                                      1830                                  
                                                                            
                                     ALONE                                  
                                                                            
                               by Edgar Allan Poe                           
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                                                            
ALONE                                                                       
                      Alone                                                 
-                                                                           
        From childhood's hour I have not been                               
        As others were; I have not seen                                     
        As others saw; I could not bring                                    
        My passions from a common spring.                                   
        From the same source I have not taken                               
        My sorrow; I could not awaken                                       
        My heart to joy at the same tone;                                   
        And all I loved, I loved alone.                                     
        Then- in my childhood, in the dawn                                  
        Of a most stormy life- was drawn                                    
        From every depth of good and ill                                    
        The mystery which binds me still:                                   
        From the torrent, or the fountain,                                  
        From the red cliff of the mountain,                                 
        From the sun that round me rolled                                   
        In its autumn tint of gold,                                         
        From the lightning in the sky                                       
        As it passed me flying by,                                          
        From the thunder and the storm,                                     
        And the cloud that took the form                                    
        (When the rest of Heaven was blue)                                  
        Of a demon in my view.                                              
-                                                                           
-                                                                           
                   -THE END-                                                
                                      1829
                                   AL AARAAF
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

                   PART I

      O! nothing earthly save the ray
      (Thrown back from flowers) of Beauty's eye,
      As in those gardens where the day
      Springs from the gems of Circassy-
      O! nothing earthly save the thrill
      Of melody in woodland rill-
      Or (music of the passion-hearted)
      Joy's voice so peacefully departed
      That like the murmur in the shell,
      Its echo dwelleth and will dwell-
      Oh, nothing of the dross of ours-
      Yet all the beauty- all the flowers
      That list our Love, and deck our bowers-
      Adorn yon world afar, afar-
      The wandering star.

      'Twas a sweet time for Nesace- for there
      Her world lay lolling on the golden air,
      Near four bright suns- a temporary rest-
      An oasis in desert of the blest.
      Away- away- 'mid seas of rays that roll
      Empyrean splendor o'er th' unchained soul-
      The soul that scarce (the billows are so dense)
      Can struggle to its destin'd eminence,-
      To distant spheres, from time to time, she rode
      And late to ours, the favor'd one of God-
      But, now, the ruler of an anchor'd realm,
      She throws aside the sceptre- leaves the helm,
      And, amid incense and high spiritual hymns,
      Laves in quadruple light her angel limbs.

      Now happiest, loveliest in yon lovely Earth,
      Whence sprang the "Idea of Beauty" into birth,
      (Falling in wreaths thro' many a startled star,
      Like woman's hair 'mid pearls, until, afar,
      It lit on hills Achaian, and there dwelt)
      She looked into Infinity- and knelt.
      Rich clouds, for canopies, about her curled-
      Fit emblems of the model of her world-
      Seen but in beauty- not impeding sight
      Of other beauty glittering thro' the light-
      A wreath that twined each starry form around,
      And all the opal'd air in color bound.

        All hurriedly she knelt upon a bed
      Of flowers: of lilies such as rear'd the head
      On the fair Capo Deucato, and sprang
      So eagerly around about to hang
      Upon the flying footsteps of- deep pride-
      Of her who lov'd a mortal- and so died.
      The Sephalica, budding with young bees,
      Upreared its purple stem around her knees:-
      And gemmy flower, of Trebizond misnam'd-
      Inmate of highest stars, where erst it sham'd
      All other loveliness:- its honied dew
      (The fabled nectar that the heathen knew)
      Deliriously sweet, was dropp'd from Heaven,
      And fell on gardens of the unforgiven
      In Trebizond- and on a sunny flower
      So like its own above that, to this hour,
      It still remaineth, torturing the bee
      With madness, and unwonted reverie:
      In Heaven, and all its environs, the leaf
      And blossom of the fairy plant in grief
      Disconsolate linger- grief that hangs her head,
      Repenting follies that full long have Red,
      Heaving her white breast to the balmy air,
      Like guilty beauty, chasten'd and more fair:
      Nyctanthes too, as sacred as the light
      She fears to perfume, perfuming the night:
      And Clytia, pondering between many a sun,
      While pettish tears adown her petals run:
      And that aspiring flower that sprang on Earth,
      And died, ere scarce exalted into birth,
      Bursting its odorous heart in spirit to wing
      Its way to Heaven, from garden of a king:
      And Valisnerian lotus, thither flown"
      From struggling with the waters of the Rhone:
      And thy most lovely purple perfume, Zante!
      Isola d'oro!- Fior di Levante!
      And the Nelumbo bud that floats for ever
      With Indian Cupid down the holy river-
      Fair flowers, and fairy! to whose care is given
      To bear the Goddess' song, in odors, up to Heaven:

           "Spirit! that dwellest where,
             In the deep sky,
           The terrible and fair,
             In beauty vie!
           Beyond the line of blue-
             The boundary of the star
           Which turneth at the view
             Of thy barrier and thy bar-
           Of the barrier overgone
             By the comets who were cast
           From their pride and from their throne
             To be drudges till the last-
           To be carriers of fire
             (The red fire of their heart)
           With speed that may not tire
             And with pain that shall not part-
           Who livest- that we know-
             In Eternity- we feel-
           But the shadow of whose brow
             What spirit shall reveal?
           Tho' the beings whom thy Nesace,
             Thy messenger hath known
           Have dream'd for thy Infinity
             A model of their own-
           Thy will is done, O God!
             The star hath ridden high
           Thro' many a tempest, but she rode
             Beneath thy burning eye;
           And here, in thought, to thee-
             In thought that can alone
           Ascend thy empire and so be
             A partner of thy throne-
           By winged Fantasy,
           My embassy is given,
           Till secrecy shall knowledge be
             In the environs of Heaven."

      She ceas'd- and buried then her burning cheek
      Abash'd, amid the lilies there, to seek
      A shelter from the fervor of His eye;
      For the stars trembled at the Deity.
      She stirr'd not- breath'd not- for a voice was there
      How solemnly pervading the calm air!
      A sound of silence on the startled ear
      Which dreamy poets name "the music of the sphere."
      Ours is a world of words: Quiet we call
      "Silence"- which is the merest word of all.
      All Nature speaks, and ev'n ideal things
      Flap shadowy sounds from visionary wings-
      But ah! not so when, thus, in realms on high
      The eternal voice of God is passing by,
      And the red winds are withering in the sky:-

        "What tho 'in worlds which sightless cycles run,
      Linked to a little system, and one sun-
      Where all my love is folly and the crowd
      Still think my terrors but the thunder cloud,
      The storm, the earthquake, and the ocean-wrath-
      (Ah! will they cross me in my angrier path?)
      What tho' in worlds which own a single sun
      The sands of Time grow dimmer as they run,
      Yet thine is my resplendency, so given
      To bear my secrets thro' the upper Heaven!
      Leave tenantless thy crystal home, and fly,
      With all thy train, athwart the moony sky-
      Apart- like fire-flies in Sicilian night,
      And wing to other worlds another light!
      Divulge the secrets of thy embassy
      To the proud orbs that twinkle- and so be
      To ev'ry heart a barrier and a ban
      Lest the stars totter in the guilt of man!"

        Up rose the maiden in the yellow night,
      The single-mooned eve!- on Earth we plight
      Our faith to one love- and one moon adore-
      The birth-place of young Beauty had no more.
      As sprang that yellow star from downy hours
      Up rose the maiden from her shrine of flowers,
      And bent o'er sheeny mountains and dim plain
      Her way, but left not yet her Therasaean reign.
                    PART II

      High on a mountain of enamell'd head-
      Such as the drowsy shepherd on his bed
      Of giant pasturage lying at his ease,
      Raising his heavy eyelid, starts and sees
      With many a mutter'd "hope to be forgiven"
      What time the moon is quadrated in Heaven-
      Of rosy head that, towering far away
      Into the sunlit ether, caught the ray
      Of sunken suns at eve- at noon of night,
      While the moon danc'd with the fair stranger light-
      Uprear'd upon such height arose a pile
      Of gorgeous columns on th' unburthen'd air,
      Flashing from Parian marble that twin smile
      Far down upon the wave that sparkled there,
      And nursled the young mountain in its lair.
      Of molten stars their pavement, such as fall
      Thro' the ebon air, besilvering the pall
      Of their own dissolution, while they die-
      Adorning then the dwellings of the sky.
      A dome, by linked light from Heaven let down,
      Sat gently on these columns as a crown-
      A window of one circular diamond, there,
      Look'd out above into the purple air,
      And rays from God shot down that meteor chain
      And hallow'd all the beauty twice again,
      Save, when, between th' empyrean and that ring,
      Some eager spirit Flapp'd his dusky wing.
      But on the pillars Seraph eyes have seen
      The dimness of this world: that greyish green
      That Nature loves the best Beauty's grave
      Lurk'd in each cornice, round each architrave-
      And every sculptur'd cherub thereabout
      That from his marble dwelling peered out,
      Seem'd earthly in the shadow of his niche-
      Achaian statues in a world so rich!
      Friezes from Tadmor and Persepolis-
      From Balbec, and the stilly, clear abyss
      Of beautiful Gomorrah! O, the wave
      Is now upon thee- but too late to save!

        Sound loves to revel in a summer night:
      Witness the murmur of the grey twilight
      That stole upon the ear, in Eyraco,
      Of many a wild star-gazer long ago-
      That stealeth ever on the ear of him
      Who, musing, gazeth on the distance dim,
      And sees the darkness coming as a cloud-
      Is not its form- its voice- most palpable and loud?

        But what is this?- it cometh, and it brings
      A music with it- 'tis the rush of wings-
      A pause- and then a sweeping, falling strain
      And Nesace is in her halls again.
      From the wild energy of wanton haste
        Her cheeks were flushing, and her lips apart;
      And zone that clung around her gentle waist
        Had burst beneath the heaving of her heart.
      Within the centre of that hall to breathe,
      She paused and panted, Zanthe! all beneath,
      The fairy light that kiss'd her golden hair
      And long'd to rest, yet could but sparkle there.

        Young flowers were whispering in melody
      To happy flowers that night- and tree to tree;
      Fountains were gushing music as they fell
      In many a star-lit grove, or moon-lit dell;
      Yet silence came upon material things-
      Fair flowers, bright waterfalls and angel wings-
      And sound alone that from the spirit sprang
      Bore burthen to the charm the maiden sang:

             "'Neath the blue-bell or streamer-
             Or tufted wild spray
           That keeps, from the dreamer,
             The moonbeam away-
           Bright beings! that ponder,
             With half closing eyes,
           On the stars which your wonder
             Hath drawn from the skies,
           Till they glance thro' the shade, and
             Come down to your brow
           Like- eyes of the maiden
             Who calls on you now-
           Arise! from your dreaming
             In violet bowers,
           To duty beseeming
             These star-litten hours-
           And shake from your tresses
             Encumber'd with dew
           The breath of those kisses
             That cumber them too-
           (O! how, without you, Love!
             Could angels be blest?)
           Those kisses of true Love
             That lull'd ye to rest!
           Up!- shake from your wing
             Each hindering thing:
           The dew of the night-
             It would weigh down your flight
           And true love caresses-
             O, leave them apart!
           They are light on the tresses,
             But lead on the heart.

           Ligeia! Ligeia!
             My beautiful one!
           Whose harshest idea
             Will to melody run,
           O! is it thy will
             On the breezes to toss?
           Or, capriciously still,
             Like the lone Albatros,
           Incumbent on night
             (As she on the air)
           To keep watch with delight
             On the harmony there?

           Ligeia! wherever
             Thy image may be,
           No magic shall sever
             Thy music from thee.
           Thou hast bound many eyes
             In a dreamy sleep-
           But the strains still arise
             Which thy vigilance keep-
           The sound of the rain,
             Which leaps down to the flower-
           And dances again
             In the rhythm of the shower-
           The murmur that springs
             From the growing of grass
           Are the music of things-
             But are modell'd, alas!-
           Away, then, my dearest,
             Oh! hie thee away
           To the springs that lie clearest
             Beneath the moon-ray-
           To lone lake that smiles,
             In its dream of deep rest,
           At the many star-isles
             That enjewel its breast-
           Where wild flowers, creeping,
             Have mingled their shade,
           On its margin is sleeping
             Full many a maid-
           Some have left the cool glade, and
             Have slept with the bee-
           Arouse them, my maiden,
             On moorland and lea-
           Go! breathe on their slumber,
             All softly in ear,
           Thy musical number
             They slumbered to hear-
           For what can awaken
             An angel so soon,
           Whose sleep hath been taken
             Beneath the cold moon,
           As the spell which no slumber
             Of witchery may test,
           The rhythmical number
             Which lull'd him to rest?"

      Spirits in wing, and angels to the view,
      A thousand seraphs burst th' Empyrean thro',
      Young dreams still hovering on their drowsy flight-
      Seraphs in all but "Knowledge," the keen light
      That fell, refracted, thro' thy bounds, afar,
      O Death! from eye of God upon that star:
      Sweet was that error- sweeter still that death-
      Sweet was that error- even with us the breath
      Of Science dims the mirror of our joy-
      To them 'twere the Simoom, and would destroy-
      For what (to them) availeth it to know
      That Truth is Falsehood- or that Bliss is Woe?
      Sweet was their death- with them to die was rife
      With the last ecstasy of satiate life-
      Beyond that death no immortality-
      But sleep that pondereth and is not "to be'!-
      And there- oh! may my weary spirit dwell-
      Apart from Heaven's Eternity- and yet how far from Hell!
      What guilty spirit, in what shrubbery dim,
      Heard not the stirring summons of that hymn?
      But two: they fell: for Heaven no grace imparts
      To those who hear not for their beating hearts.
      A maiden-angel and her seraph-lover-
      O! where (and ye may seek the wide skies over)
      Was Love, the blind, near sober Duty known?
      Unguided Love hath fallen- 'mid "tears of perfect moan."
      He was a goodly spirit- he who fell:
      A wanderer by moss-y-mantled well-
      A gazer on the lights that shine above-
      A dreamer in the moonbeam by his love:
      What wonder? for each star is eye-like there,
      And looks so sweetly down on Beauty's hair-
      And they, and ev'ry mossy spring were holy
      To his love-haunted heart and melancholy.
      The night had found (to him a night of woe)
      Upon a mountain crag, young Angelo-
      Beetling it bends athwart the solemn sky,
      And scowls on starry worlds that down beneath it lie.
      Here sat he with his love- his dark eye bent
      With eagle gaze along the firmament:
      Now turn'd it upon her- but ever then
      It trembled to the orb of EARTH again.

      "Ianthe, dearest, see- how dim that ray!
      How lovely 'tis to look so far away!
      She seem'd not thus upon that autumn eve
      I left her gorgeous halls- nor mourn'd to leave.
      That eve- that eve- I should remember well-
      The sun-ray dropp'd in Lemnos, with a spell
      On th' arabesque carving of a gilded hall
      Wherein I sate, and on the draperied wall-
      And on my eyelids- O the heavy light!
      How drowsily it weigh'd them into night!
      On flowers, before, and mist, and love they ran
      With Persian Saadi in his Gulistan:
      But O that light!- I slumber'd- Death, the while,
      Stole o'er my senses in that lovely isle
      So softly that no single silken hair
      Awoke that slept- or knew that he was there.

      "The last spot of Earth's orb I trod upon
      Was a proud temple call'd the Parthenon;
      More beauty clung around her column'd wall
      Than ev'n thy glowing bosom beats withal,
      And when old Time my wing did disenthral
      Thence sprang I- as the eagle from his tower,
      And years I left behind me in an hour.
      What time upon her airy bounds I hung,
      One half the garden of her globe was flung
      Unrolling as a chart unto my view-
      Tenantless cities of the desert too!
      Ianthe, beauty crowded on me then,
      And half I wish'd to be again of men."

      "My Angelo! and why of them to be?
      A brighter dwelling-place is here for thee-
      And greener fields than in yon world above,
      And woman's loveliness- and passionate love."

      "But, list, Ianthe! when the air so soft
      Fail'd, as my pennon'd spirit leapt aloft,
      Perhaps my brain grew dizzy- but the world
      I left so late was into chaos hurl'd-
      Sprang from her station, on the winds apart.
      And roll'd, a flame, the fiery Heaven athwart.
      Methought, my sweet one, then I ceased to soar
      And fell- not swiftly as I rose before,
      But with a downward, tremulous motion thro'
      Light, brazen rays, this golden star unto!
      Nor long the measure of my falling hours,
      For nearest of all stars was thine to ours-
      Dread star! that came, amid a night of mirth,
      A red Daedalion on the timid Earth."

      "We came- and to thy Earth- but not to us
      Be given our lady's bidding to discuss:
      We came, my love; around, above, below,
      Gay fire-fly of the night we come and go,
      Nor ask a reason save the angel-nod
      She grants to us, as granted by her God-
      But, Angelo, than thine grey Time unfurl'd
      Never his fairy wing O'er fairier world!
      Dim was its little disk, and angel eyes
      Alone could see the phantom in the skies,
      When first Al Aaraaf knew her course to be
      Headlong thitherward o'er the starry sea-
      But when its glory swell'd upon the sky,
      As glowing Beauty's bust beneath man's eye,
      We paused before the heritage of men,
      And thy star trembled- as doth Beauty then!"

      Thus, in discourse, the lovers whiled away
      The night that waned and waned and brought no day.
      They fell: for Heaven to them no hope imparts
      Who hear not for the beating of their hearts.

                         -THE END-
.
                                      1830
                                     ALONE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
ALONE

        From childhood's hour I have not been
        As others were; I have not seen
        As others saw; I could not bring
        My passions from a common spring.
        From the same source I have not taken
        My sorrow; I could not awaken
        My heart to joy at the same tone;
        And all I loved, I loved alone.
        Then- in my childhood, in the dawn
        Of a most stormy life- was drawn
        From every depth of good and ill
        The mystery which binds me still:
        From the torrent, or the fountain,
        From the red cliff of the mountain,
        From the sun that round me rolled
        In its autumn tint of gold,
        From the lightning in the sky
        As it passed me flying by,
        From the thunder and the storm,
        And the cloud that took the form
        (When the rest of Heaven was blue)
        Of a demon in my view.

                   -THE END-
.
                                      1849
                                  ANNABEL LEE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

    It was many and many a year ago,
          In a kingdom by the sea,
    That a maiden there lived whom you may know
          By the name of ANNABEL LEE;
    And this maiden she lived with no other thought
          Than to love and be loved by me.

    I was a child and she was a child,
          In this kingdom by the sea;
    But we loved with a love that was more than love-
          I and my Annabel Lee;
    With a love that the winged seraphs of heaven
          Coveted her and me.

    And this was the reason that, long ago,
          In this kingdom by the sea,
    A wind blew out of a cloud, chilling
          My beautiful Annabel Lee;
    So that her highborn kinsman came
          And bore her away from me,
    To shut her up in a sepulchre
          In this kingdom by the sea.

    The angels, not half so happy in heaven,
          Went envying her and me-
    Yes!- that was the reason (as all men know,
          In this kingdom by the sea)
    That the wind came out of the cloud by night,
          Chilling and killing my Annabel Lee.

    But our love it was stronger by far than the love
          Of those who were older than we-
          Of many far wiser than we-
    And neither the angels in heaven above,
          Nor the demons down under the sea,
    Can ever dissever my soul from the soul
          Of the beautiful Annabel Lee.

    For the moon never beams without bringing me dreams
          Of the beautiful Annabel Lee;
    And the stars never rise but I feel the bright eyes
          Of the beautiful Annabel Lee;
    And so, all the night-tide, I lie down by the side
    Of my darling- my darling- my life and my bride,
          In the sepulchre there by the sea,
          In her tomb by the sounding sea.

                      -THE END-
.
                                      1849
                                   THE BELLS
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

                        I

          Hear the sledges with the bells-
                   Silver bells!
   What a world of merriment their melody foretells!
          How they tinkle, tinkle, tinkle,
              In the icy air of night!
          While the stars that oversprinkle
          All the heavens, seem to twinkle
             With a crystalline delight;
                Keeping time, time, time,
             In a sort of Runic rhyme,
   To the tintinnabulation that so musically wells
             From the bells, bells, bells, bells,
                   Bells, bells, bells-
   From the jingling and the tinkling of the bells.

                        II

          Hear the mellow wedding bells,
                   Golden bells!
   What a world of happiness their harmony foretells!
          Through the balmy air of night
          How they ring out their delight!
            From the molten-golden notes,
                   And an in tune,
            What a liquid ditty floats
   To the turtle-dove that listens, while she gloats
                   On the moon!
          Oh, from out the sounding cells,
   What a gush of euphony voluminously wells!
                   How it swells!
                   How it dwells
            On the Future! how it tells
            Of the rapture that impels
          To the swinging and the ringing
            Of the bells, bells, bells,
          Of the bells, bells, bells,bells,
                   Bells, bells, bells-
   To the rhyming and the chiming of the bells!

                        III

          Hear the loud alarum bells-
                   Brazen bells!
   What a tale of terror, now, their turbulency tells!
          In the startled ear of night
        How they scream out their affright!
          Too much horrified to speak,
          They can only shriek, shriek,
                   Out of tune,
   In a clamorous appealing to the mercy of the fire,
   In a mad expostulation with the deaf and frantic fire,
          Leaping higher, higher, higher,
            With a desperate desire,
          And a resolute endeavor,
          Now- now to sit or never,
        By the side of the pale-faced moon.
           Oh, the bells, bells, bells!
           What a tale their terror tells
                   Of Despair!
         How they clang, and clash, and roar!
         What a horror they outpour
       On the bosom of the palpitating air!
           Yet the ear it fully knows,
                   By the twanging,
                   And the clanging,
           How the danger ebbs and flows:
           Yet the ear distinctly tells,
                   In the jangling,
                   And the wrangling,
           How the danger sinks and swells,
   By the sinking or the swelling in the anger of the bells-
                   Of the bells-
           Of the bells, bells, bells,bells,
                 Bells, bells, bells-
      In the clamor and the clangor of the bells!

                        IV

          Hear the tolling of the bells-
                   Iron Bells!
   What a world of solemn thought their monody compels!
          In the silence of the night,
          How we shiver with affright
     At the melancholy menace of their tone!
          For every sound that floats
          From the rust within their throats
                    Is a groan.
          And the people- ah, the people-
          They that dwell up in the steeple,
                   All Alone
          And who, tolling, tolling, tolling,
            In that muffled monotone,
          Feel a glory in so rolling
            On the human heart a stone-
          They are neither man nor woman-
          They are neither brute nor human-
                   They are Ghouls:
            And their king it is who tolls;
            And he rolls, rolls, rolls,
                   Rolls
              A paean from the bells!
          And his merry bosom swells
            With the paean of the bells!
          And he dances, and he yells;
          Keeping time, time, time,
          In a sort of Runic rhyme,
            To the paean of the bells-
                   Of the bells:
          Keeping time, time, time,
          In a sort of Runic rhyme,
            To the throbbing of the bells-
          Of the bells, bells, bells-
            To the sobbing of the bells;
          Keeping time, time, time,
            As he knells, knells, knells,
          In a happy Runic rhyme,
            To the rolling of the bells-
          Of the bells, bells, bells:
            To the tolling of the bells,
          Of the bells, bells, bells, bells-
            Bells, bells, bells-
    To the moaning and the groaning of the bells.

                         -THE END-
.
                                      1837
                                 BRIDAL BALLAD
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

       The ring is on my hand,
         And the wreath is on my brow;
       Satin and jewels grand
       Are all at my command,
         And I am happy now.

       And my lord he loves me well;
         But, when first he breathed his vow,
       I felt my bosom swell-
       For the words rang as a knell,
       And the voice seemed his who fell
       In the battle down the dell,
         And who is happy now.

       But he spoke to re-assure me,
         And he kissed my pallid brow,
       While a reverie came o'er me,
       And to the church-yard bore me,
       And I sighed to him before me,
       Thinking him dead D'Elormie,
       "Oh, I am happy now!"

       And thus the words were spoken,
         And this the plighted vow,
       And, though my faith be broken,
       And, though my heart be broken,
       Here is a ring, as token
         That I am happy now!

       Would God I could awaken!
         For I dream I know not how!
       And my soul is sorely shaken
       Lest an evil step be taken,-
       Lest the dead who is forsaken
         May not be happy now.
                                         -THE END-
.
                                      1831
                              THE CITY IN THE SEA
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      Lo! Death has reared himself a throne
      In a strange city lying alone
      Far down within the dim West,
      Where the good and the bad and the worst and the best
      Have gone to their eternal rest.
      There shrines and palaces and towers
      (Time-eaten towers that tremble not!)
      Resemble nothing that is ours.
      Around, by lifting winds forgot,
      Resignedly beneath the sky
      The melancholy waters he.

      No rays from the holy heaven come down
      On the long night-time of that town;
      But light from out the lurid sea
      Streams up the turrets silently-
      Gleams up the pinnacles far and free-
      Up domes- up spires- up kingly halls-
      Up fanes- up Babylon-like walls-
      Up shadowy long-forgotten bowers
      Of sculptured ivy and stone flowers-
      Up many and many a marvellous shrine
      Whose wreathed friezes intertwine
      The viol, the violet, and the vine.
      Resignedly beneath the sky
      The melancholy waters lie.
      So blend the turrets and shadows there
      That all seem pendulous in air,
      While from a proud tower in the town
      Death looks gigantically down.

      There open fanes and gaping graves
      Yawn level with the luminous waves;
      But not the riches there that lie
      In each idol's diamond eye-
      Not the gaily-jewelled dead
      Tempt the waters from their bed;
      For no ripples curl, alas!
      Along that wilderness of glass-
      No swellings tell that winds may be
      Upon some far-off happier sea-
      No heavings hint that winds have been
      On seas less hideously serene.

      But lo, a stir is in the air!
      The wave- there is a movement there!
      As if the towers had thrust aside,
      In slightly sinking, the dull tide-
      As if their tops had feebly given
      A void within the filmy Heaven.
      The waves have now a redder glow-
      The hours are breathing faint and low-
      And when, amid no earthly moans,
      Down, down that town shall settle hence,
      Hell, rising from a thousand thrones,
      Shall do it reverence.

              -THE END-
.
                                      1833
                                  THE COLISEUM
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

       Type of the antique Rome! Rich reliquary
       Of lofty contemplation left to Time
       By buried centuries of pomp and power!
       At length- at length- after so many days
       Of weary pilgrimage and burning thirst,
       (Thirst for the springs of lore that in thee lie,)
       I kneel, an altered and an humble man,
       Amid thy shadows, and so drink within
       My very soul thy grandeur, gloom, and glory!

       Vastness! and Age! and Memories of Eld!
       Silence! and Desolation! and dim Night!
       I feel ye now- I feel ye in your strength-
       O spells more sure than e'er Judaean king
       Taught in the gardens of Gethsemane!
       O charms more potent than the rapt Chaldee
       Ever drew down from out the quiet stars!

       Here, where a hero fell, a column falls!
       Here, where the mimic eagle glared in gold,
       A midnight vigil holds the swarthy bat!
       Here, where the dames of Rome their gilded hair
       Waved to the wind, now wave the reed and thistle!
       Here, where on golden throne the monarch lolled,
       Glides, spectre-like, unto his marble home,
       Lit by the wan light of the horned moon,
       The swift and silent lizard of the stones!

       But stay! these walls- these ivy-clad arcades-
       These moldering plinths- these sad and blackened shafts-
       These vague entablatures- this crumbling frieze-
       These shattered cornices- this wreck- this ruin-
       These stones- alas! these grey stones- are they all-
       All of the famed, and the colossal left
       By the corrosive Hours to Fate and me?

       "Not all"- the Echoes answer me- "not all!
       Prophetic sounds and loud, arise forever
       From us, and from all Ruin, unto the wise,
       As melody from Memnon to the Sun.
       We rule the hearts of mightiest men- we rule
       With a despotic sway all giant minds.
       We are not impotent- we pallid stones.
       Not all our power is gone- not all our fame-
       Not all the magic of our high renown-
       Not all the wonder that encircles us-
       Not all the mysteries that in us lie-
       Not all the memories that hang upon
       And cling around about us as a garment,
       Clothing us in a robe of more than glory."

                      -THE END-
.
                                      1843
                               THE CONQUEROR WORM
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

       Lo! 'tis a gala night
         Within the lonesome latter years!
       An angel throng, bewinged, bedight
         In veils, and drowned in tears,
       Sit in a theatre, to see
         A play of hopes and fears,
       While the orchestra breathes fitfully
         The music of the spheres.

       Mimes, in the form of God on high,
         Mutter and mumble low,
       And hither and thither fly-
         Mere puppets they, who come and go
       At bidding of vast formless things
         That shift the scenery to and fro,
       Flapping from out their Condor wings
         Invisible Woe!

       That motley drama- oh, be sure
         It shall not be forgot!
       With its Phantom chased for evermore,
         By a crowd that seize it not,
       Through a circle that ever returneth in
         To the self-same spot,
       And much of Madness, and more of Sin,
         And Horror the soul of the plot.

       But see, amid the mimic rout
         A crawling shape intrude!
       A blood-red thing that writhes from out
         The scenic solitude!
       It writhes!- it writhes!- with mortal pangs
         The mimes become its food,
       And seraphs sob at vermin fangs
         In human gore imbued.

       Out- out are the lights- out all!
         And, over each quivering form,
       The curtain, a funeral pall,
         Comes down with the rush of a storm,
       While the angels, all pallid and wan,
         Uprising, unveiling, affirm
       That the play is the tragedy, "Man,"
         And its hero the Conqueror Worm.

                    -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                                    A DREAM
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      In visions of the dark night
        I have dreamed of joy departed-
      But a waking dream of life and light
        Hath left me broken-hearted.

      Ah! what is not a dream by day
        To him whose eyes are cast
      On things around him with a ray
        Turned back upon the past?

      That holy dream- that holy dream,
        While all the world were chiding,
      Hath cheered me as a lovely beam
        A lonely spirit guiding.

      What though that light, thro' storm and night,
        So trembled from afar-
      What could there be more purely bright
        In Truth's day-star?

                    -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                             A DREAM WITHIN A DREAM
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

          Take this kiss upon the brow!
          And, in parting from you now,
          Thus much let me avow-
          You are not wrong, who deem
          That my days have been a dream;
          Yet if hope has flown away
          In a night, or in a day,
          In a vision, or in none,
          Is it therefore the less gone?
          All that we see or seem
          Is but a dream within a dream.

          I stand amid the roar
          Of a surf-tormented shore,
          And I hold within my hand
          Grains of the golden sand-
          How few! yet how they creep
          Through my fingers to the deep,
          While I weep- while I weep!
          O God! can I not grasp
          Them with a tighter clasp?
          O God! can I not save
          One from the pitiless wave?
          Is all that we see or seem
          But a dream within a dream?

                  -THE END-
.
                                      1844
                                   DREAMLAND
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
DREAMLAND

            By a route obscure and lonely,
            Haunted by ill angels only,
            Where an Eidolon, named NIGHT,
            On a black throne reigns upright,
            I have reached these lands but newly
            From an ultimate dim Thule-
            From a wild clime that lieth, sublime,
               Out of SPACE- out of TIME.

            Bottomless vales and boundless floods,
            And chasms, and caves, and Titan woods,
            With forms that no man can discover
            For the tears that drip all over;
            Mountains toppling evermore
            Into seas without a shore;
            Seas that restlessly aspire,
            Surging, unto skies of fire;
            Lakes that endlessly outspread
            Their lone waters- lone and dead,-
            Their still waters- still and chilly
            With the snows of the lolling lily.

            By the lakes that thus outspread
            Their lone waters, lone and dead,-
            Their sad waters, sad and chilly
            With the snows of the lolling lily,-
            By the mountains- near the river
            Murmuring lowly, murmuring ever,-
            By the grey woods,- by the swamp
            Where the toad and the newt encamp-
            By the dismal tarns and pools
               Where dwell the Ghouls,-
            By each spot the most unholy-
            In each nook most melancholy-
            There the traveller meets aghast
            Sheeted Memories of the Past-
            Shrouded forms that start and sigh
            As they pass the wanderer by-
            White-robed forms of friends long given,
            In agony, to the Earth- and Heaven.

            For the heart whose woes are legion
            'Tis a peaceful, soothing region-
            For the spirit that walks in shadow
            'Tis- oh, 'tis an Eldorado!
            But the traveller, travelling through it,
            May not- dare not openly view it!
            Never its mysteries are exposed
            To the weak human eye unclosed;
            So wills its King, who hath forbid
            The uplifting of the fringed lid;
            And thus the sad Soul that here passes
            Beholds it but through darkened glasses.

            By a route obscure and lonely,
            Haunted by ill angels only,
            Where an Eidolon, named NIGHT,
            On a black throne reigns upright,
            I have wandered home but newly
            From this ultimate dim Thule.

                     -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                                     DREAMS
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
DREAMS

    Oh! that my young life were a lasting dream!
    My spirit not awakening, till the beam
    Of an Eternity should bring the morrow.
    Yes! tho' that long dream were of hopeless sorrow,
    'Twere better than the cold reality
    Of waking life, to him whose heart must be,
    And hath been still, upon the lovely earth,
    A chaos of deep passion, from his birth.
    But should it be- that dream eternally
    Continuing- as dreams have been to me
    In my young boyhood- should it thus be given,
    'Twere folly still to hope for higher Heaven.
    For I have revell'd, when the sun was bright
    I' the summer sky, in dreams of living light
    And loveliness,- have left my very heart
    In climes of my imagining, apart
    From mine own home, with beings that have been
    Of mine own thought- what more could I have seen?
    'Twas once- and only once- and the wild hour
    From my remembrance shall not pass- some power
    Or spell had bound me- 'twas the chilly wind
    Came o'er me in the night, and left behind
    Its image on my spirit- or the moon
    Shone on my slumbers in her lofty noon
    Too coldly- or the stars- howe'er it was
    That dream was as that night-wind- let it pass.

    I have been happy, tho' in a dream.
    I have been happy- and I love the theme:
    Dreams! in their vivid coloring of life,
    As in that fleeting, shadowy, misty strife
    Of semblance with reality, which brings
    To the delirious eye, more lovely things
    Of Paradise and Love- and all our own!
    Than young Hope in his sunniest hour hath known.
                                                        -THE END-
.
                                      1850

                              THE DUC DE L'OMLETTE

                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      And stepped at once into a cooler clime.          Cowper

  KEATS fell by a criticism. Who was it died of "The Andromache"?*
Ignoble souls!- De L'Omelette perished of an ortolan. L'histoire en
est breve. Assist me, Spirit of Apicius!

  *Montfleury. The author of the Parnasse Reforme makes him thus speak
in Hades:- "L'homme donc qui voudrait savoir ce dont Je suis morte,
qu'il ne demande pas si'l fut de fievre ou de podagre ou d'autre
chose, mais qui'l entende que ce fut de 'L'Andromache.'"

  A golden cage bore the little winged wanderer, enamored, melting,
indolent, to the Chaussee D'Antin, from its home in far Peru. From its
queenly possessor La Bellissima, to the Duc De L'Omelette, six peers
of the empire conveyed the happy bird.

  That night the Duc was to sup alone. In the privacy of his bureau he
reclined languidly on that ottoman for which he sacrificed his loyalty
in outbidding his king- the notorious ottoman of Cadet.

  He buries his face in the pillow. The clock strikes! Unable to
restrain his feelings, his Grace swallows an olive. At this moment the
door gently opens to the sound of soft music, and lo! the most
delicate of birds is before the most enamored of men! But what
inexpressible dismay now overshadows the countenance of the Duc?-
"Horreur!- chien!- Baptiste!- l'oiseau! ah, bon Dieu! cet oiseau
modeste que tu as deshabille de ses plumes, et que tu as servi sans
papier!" It is superfluous to say more:- the Duc expired in a
paroxysm of disgust.

  "Ha! ha! ha!" said his Grace on the third day after his decease.

  "He! he! he!" replied the Devil faintly, drawing himself up with
an air of hauteur.

  "Why, surely you are not serious," retorted De L'Omelette. "I have
sinned- c'est vrai- but, my good sir, consider!- you have no actual
intention of putting such- such barbarous threats into execution."

  "No what?" said his majesty- "come, sir, strip!"

  "Strip, indeed! very pretty i' faith! no, sir, I shall not strip.
Who are you, pray, that I, Duc De L'Omelette, Prince de Foie-Gras,
just come of age, author of the 'Mazurkiad,' and Member of the
Academy, should divest myself at your bidding of the sweetest
pantaloons ever made by Bourdon, the daintiest robe-de-chambre ever
put together by Rombert- to say nothing of the taking my hair out of
paper- not to mention the trouble I should have in drawing off my
gloves?"

  "Who am I?- ah, true! I am Baal-Zebub, Prince of the Fly. I took
thee, just now, from a rose-wood coffin inlaid with ivory. Thou wast
curiously scented, and labelled as per invoice. Belial sent thee,- my
Inspector of Cemeteries. The pantaloons, which thou sayest were made
by Bourdon, are an excellent pair of linen drawers, and thy
robe-de-chambre is a shroud of no scanty dimensions."

  "Sir!" replied the Duc, "I am not to be insulted with impunity!-
Sir! I shall take the earliest opportunity of avenging this insult!-
Sir! you shall hear from me! in the meantime au revoir!"- and the Duc
was bowing himself out of the Satanic presence, when he was
interrupted and brought back by a gentleman in waiting. Hereupon his
Grace rubbed his eyes, yawned, shrugged his shoulders, reflected.
Having become satisfied of his identity, he took a bird's eye view of
his whereabouts.

  The apartment was superb. Even De L'Omelette pronounced it bien
comme il faut. It was not its length nor its breadth,- but its
height- ah, that was appalling!- There was no ceiling- certainly none-
but a dense whirling mass of fiery-colored clouds. His Grace's brain
reeled as he glanced upward. From above, hung a chain of an unknown
blood-red metal- its upper end lost, like the city of Boston, parmi
les nues. From its nether extremity swung a large cresset. The Duc
knew it to be a ruby; but from it there poured a light so intense,
so still, so terrible, Persia never worshipped such- Gheber never
imagined such- Mussulman never dreamed of such when, drugged with
opium, he has tottered to a bed of poppies, his back to the flowers,
and his face to the God Apollo. The Duc muttered a slight oath,
decidedly approbatory.

  The corners of the room were rounded into niches. Three of these
were filled with statues of gigantic proportions. Their beauty was
Grecian, their deformity Egyptian, their tout ensemble French. In
the fourth niche the statue was veiled; it was not colossal. But
then there was a taper ankle, a sandalled foot. De L'Omelette
pressed his hand upon his heart, closed his eyes, raised them, and
caught his Satanic Majesty- in a blush.

  But the paintings!- Kupris! Astarte! Astoreth!- a thousand and the
same! And Rafaelle has beheld them! Yes, Rafaelle has been here, for
did he not paint the ---? and was he not consequently damned? The
paintings- the paintings! O luxury! O love!- who, gazing on those
forbidden beauties, shall have eyes for the dainty devices of the
golden frames that besprinkled, like stars, the hyacinth and the
porphyry walls?

  But the Duc's heart is fainting within him. He is not, however, as
you suppose, dizzy with magnificence, nor drunk with the ecstatic
breath of those innumerable censers. C'est vrai que de toutes ces
choses il a pense beaucoup- mais! The Duc De L'Omelette is
terror-stricken; for, through the lurid vista which a single
uncurtained window is affording, lo! gleams the most ghastly of all
fires!

  Le pauvre Duc! He could not help imagining that the glorious, the
voluptuous, the never-dying melodies which pervaded that hall, as they
passed filtered and transmuted through the alchemy of the enchanted
window-panes, were the wailings and the howlings of the hopeless and
the damned! And there, too!- there!- upon the ottoman!- who could he
be?- he, the petitmaitre- no, the Deity- who sat as if carved in
marble, et qui sourit, with his pale countenance, si amerement?

  Mais il faut agir- that is to say, a Frenchman never faints
outright. Besides, his Grace hated a scene- De L'Omelette is himself
again. There were some foils upon a table- some points also. The Duc
s'echapper. He measures two points, and, with a grace inimitable,
offers his Majesty the choice. Horreur! his Majesty does not fence!

  Mais il joue!- how happy a thought!- but his Grace had always an
excellent memory. He had dipped in the "Diable" of Abbe Gualtier.
Therein it is said "que le Diable n'ose pas refuser un jeu d'ecarte."

  But the chances- the chances! True- desperate: but scarcely more
desperate than the Duc. Besides, was he not in the secret?- had he
not skimmed over Pere Le Brun?- was he not a member of the Club
Vingt-un? "Si je perds," said he, "je serai deux fois perdu- I shall
be doubly dammed- voila tout! (Here his Grace shrugged his
shoulders.) Si je gagne, je reviendrai a mes ortolans- que les cartes
soient preparees!"

  His Grace was all care, all attention- his Majesty all confidence.
A spectator would have thought of Francis and Charles. His Grace
thought of his game. His Majesty did not think; he shuffled. The Duc
cut.

  The cards were dealt. The trump is turned- it is- it is- the king!
No- it was the queen. His Majesty cursed her masculine habiliments.
De L'Omelette placed his hand upon his heart.

  They play. The Duc counts. The hand is out. His Majesty counts
heavily, smiles, and is taking wine. The Duc slips a card.

  "C'est a vous a faire," said his Majesty, cutting. His Grace
bowed, dealt, and arose from the table en presentant le Roi.

  His Majesty looked chagrined.

  Had Alexander not been Alexander, he would have been Diogenes; and
the Duc assured his antagonist in taking leave, "que s'il n'eut ete De
L'Omelette il n'aurait point d'objection d'etre le Diable."

                                   -THE END-
.
                                      1849
                                    ELDORADO
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
ELDORADO

                   Gaily bedight,
                   A gallant knight,
               In sunshine and in shadow,
                   Had journeyed long,
                   Singing a song,
               In search of Eldorado.

                   But he grew old-
                   This knight so bold-
               And o'er his heart a shadow
                   Fell as he found
                   No spot of ground
               That looked like Eldorado.

                   And, as his strength
                   Failed him at length,
               He met a pilgrim shadow-
                   "Shadow," said he,
                   "Where can it be-
               This land of Eldorado?"

                   "Over the Mountains
                   Of the Moon,
               Down the Valley of the Shadow,
                   Ride, boldly ride,"
                   The shade replied-
               "If you seek for Eldorado!"

                         -THE END-
.
                                      1850
                                   ELIZABETH
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
ELIZABETH

  Elizabeth, it surely is most fit
  [Logic and common usage so commanding]
  In thy own book that first thy name be writ,
  Zeno and other sages notwithstanding;
  And I have other reasons for so doing
  Besides my innate love of contradiction;
  Each poet - if a poet - in pursuing
  The muses thro' their bowers of Truth or Fiction,
  Has studied very little of his part,
  Read nothing, written less - in short's a fool
  Endued with neither soul, nor sense, nor art,
  Being ignorant of one important rule,
  Employed in even the theses of the school-
  Called - I forget the heathenish Greek name
  [Called anything, its meaning is the same]
  "Always write first things uppermost in the heart."

                                    THE END
.
                                      1848
                                   AN ENIGMA
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      "Seldom we find," says Solomon Don Dunce,
        "Half an idea in the profoundest sonnet.
      Through all the flimsy things we see at once
        As easily as through a Naples bonnet-
        Trash of all trash!- how can a lady don it?
      Yet heavier far than your Petrarchan stuff-
      Owl-downy nonsense that the faintest puff
        Twirls into trunk-paper the while you con it."
      And, veritably, Sol is right enough.
      The general tuckermanities are arrant
      Bubbles- ephemeral and so transparent-
        But this is, now- you may depend upon it-
      Stable, opaque, immortal- all by dint
      Of the dear names that he concealed within 't.

                     -THE END-
.
                                      1845
                                    EULALIE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
EULALIE

                  I dwelt alone
                  In a world of moan,
           And my soul was a stagnant tide,
  Till the fair and gentle Eulalie became my blushing bride-
  Till the yellow-haired young Eulalie became my smiling bride.

                  Ah, less- less bright
                  The stars of the night
           Than the eyes of the radiant girl!
                  That the vapor can make
           With the moon-tints of purple and pearl,
  Can vie with the modest Eulalie's most unregarded curl-
  Can compare with the bright-eyed Eulalie's most humble and careless
         curl.

                  Now Doubt- now Pain
                  Come never again,
           For her soul gives me sigh for sigh,
                  And all day long
                  Shines, bright and strong,
           Astarte within the sky,
  While ever to her dear Eulalie upturns her matron eye-
  While ever to her young Eulalie upturns her violet eye.

                       -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                                  EVENING STAR
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

              'Twas noontide of summer,
                And mid-time of night;
              And stars, in their orbits,
                Shone pale, thro' the light
              Of the brighter, cold moon,
                'Mid planets her slaves,
              Herself in the Heavens,
                Her beam on the waves.
                  I gazed awhile
                  On her cold smile;
              Too cold- too cold for me-
                There pass'd, as a shroud,
                A fleecy cloud,
              And I turned away to thee,
                Proud Evening Star,
                In thy glory afar,
              And dearer thy beam shall be;
                For joy to my heart
                Is the proud part
              Thou bearest in Heaven at night,
                And more I admire
                Thy distant fire,
              Than that colder, lowly light.

-                      -THE END-
.
                                      1829
                                   FAIRY-LAND
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

          Dim vales- and shadowy floods-
          And cloudy-looking woods,
          Whose forms we can't discover
          For the tears that drip all over!
          Huge moons there wax and wane-
          Again- again- again-
          Every moment of the night-
          Forever changing places-
          And they put out the star-light
          With the breath from their pale faces.
          About twelve by the moon-dial,
          One more filmy than the rest
          (A kind which, upon trial,
          They have found to be the best)
          Comes down- still down- and down,
          With its centre on the crown
          Of a mountain's eminence,
          While its wide circumference
          In easy drapery falls
          Over hamlets, over halls,
          Wherever they may be-
          O'er the strange woods- o'er the sea-
          Over spirits on the wing-
          Over every drowsy thing-
          And buries them up quite
          In a labyrinth of light-
          And then, how deep!- O, deep!
          Is the passion of their sleep.
          In the morning they arise,
          And their moony covering
          Is soaring in the skies,
          With the tempests as they toss,
          Like- almost anything-
          Or a yellow Albatross.
          They use that moon no more
          For the same end as before-
          Videlicet, a tent-
          Which I think extravagant:
          Its atomies, however,
          Into a shower dissever,
          Of which those butterflies
          Of Earth, who seek the skies,
          And so come down again,
          (Never-contented things!)
          Have brought a specimen
          Upon their quivering wings.

                    -THE END-
.
                                      1849
                                   FOR ANNIE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

            Thank Heaven! the crisis-
              The danger is past,
            And the lingering illness
              Is over at last-
            And the fever called "Living"
              Is conquered at last.

            Sadly, I know
              I am shorn of my strength,
            And no muscle I move
              As I lie at full length-
            But no matter!-I feel
              I am better at length.

            And I rest so composedly,
              Now, in my bed
            That any beholder
              Might fancy me dead-
            Might start at beholding me,
              Thinking me dead.

            The moaning and groaning,
              The sighing and sobbing,
            Are quieted now,
              With that horrible throbbing
            At heart:- ah, that horrible,
              Horrible throbbing!

            The sickness- the nausea-
              The pitiless pain-
            Have ceased, with the fever
              That maddened my brain-
            With the fever called "Living"
              That burned in my brain.

            And oh! of all tortures
              That torture the worst
            Has abated- the terrible
              Torture of thirst
            For the naphthaline river
              Of Passion accurst:-
            I have drunk of a water
              That quenches all thirst:-

            Of a water that flows,
              With a lullaby sound,
            From a spring but a very few
              Feet under ground-
            From a cavern not very far
              Down under ground.

            And ah! let it never
              Be foolishly said
            That my room it is gloomy
              And narrow my bed;
            For man never slept
              In a different bed-
            And, to sleep, you must slumber
              In just such a bed.

            My tantalized spirit
              Here blandly reposes,
            Forgetting, or never
              Regretting its roses-
            Its old agitations
              Of myrtles and roses:

            For now, while so quietly
              Lying, it fancies
            A holier odor
              About it, of pansies-
            A rosemary odor,
              Commingled with pansies-
            With rue and the beautiful
              Puritan pansies.

            And so it lies happily,
              Bathing in many
            A dream of the truth
              And the beauty of Annie-
            Drowned in a bath
              Of the tresses of Annie.

            She tenderly kissed me,
              She fondly caressed,
            And then I fell gently
              To sleep on her breast-
            Deeply to sleep
              From the heaven of her breast.

            When the light was extinguished,
              She covered me warm,
            And she prayed to the angels
              To keep me from harm-
            To the queen of the angels
              To shield me from harm.

            And I lie so composedly,
              Now, in my bed,
            (Knowing her love)
              That you fancy me dead-
            And I rest so contentedly,
              Now, in my bed,
            (With her love at my breast)
              That you fancy me dead-
            That you shudder to look at me,
              Thinking me dead.

            But my heart it is brighter
              Than all of the many
            Stars in the sky,
              For it sparkles with Annie-
            It glows with the light
              Of the love of my Annie-
            With the thought of the light
              Of the eyes of my Annie.

                     -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                      THE HAPPIEST DAY, THE HAPPIEST HOUR
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      The happiest day- the happiest hour
        My sear'd and blighted heart hath known,
      The highest hope of pride and power,
        I feel hath flown.

      Of power! said I? yes! such I ween;
        But they have vanish'd long, alas!
      The visions of my youth have been-
        But let them pass.

      And, pride, what have I now with thee?
        Another brow may even inherit
      The venom thou hast pour'd on me
        Be still, my spirit!

      The happiest day- the happiest hour
        Mine eyes shall see- have ever seen,
      The brightest glance of pride and power,
        I feel- have been:

      But were that hope of pride and power
        Now offer'd with the pain
      Even then I felt- that brightest hour
        I would not live again:

      For on its wing was dark alloy,
        And, as it flutter'd- fell
      An essence- powerful to destroy
        A soul that knew it well.

                     -THE END-
.
                                      1839
                               THE HAUNTED PALACE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

       In the greenest of our valleys
         By good angels tenanted,
       Once a fair and stately palace-
         Radiant palace- reared its head.
       In the monarch Thought's dominion-
         It stood there!
       Never seraph spread a pinion
         Over fabric half so fair!

       Banners yellow, glorious, golden,
         On its roof did float and flow,
       (This- all this- was in the olden
         Time long ago,)
       And every gentle air that dallied,
         In that sweet day,
       Along the ramparts plumed and pallid,
         A winged odor went away.

       Wanderers in that happy valley,
         Through two luminous windows, saw
       Spirits moving musically,
         To a lute's well-tuned law,
       Round about a throne where, sitting
         (Porphyrogene!)
       In state his glory well-befitting,
         The ruler of the realm was seen.

       And all with pearl and ruby glowing
         Was the fair palace door,
       Through which came flowing, flowing, flowing,
         And sparkling evermore,
       A troop of Echoes, whose sweet duty
         Was but to sing,
       In voices of surpassing beauty,
         The wit and wisdom of their king.

       But evil things, in robes of sorrow,
         Assailed the monarch's high estate.
       (Ah, let us mourn!- for never morrow
         Shall dawn upon him desolate!)
       And round about his home the glory
         That blushed and bloomed,
       Is but a dim-remembered story
         Of the old time entombed.

       And travellers, now, within that valley,
         Through the red-litten windows see
       Vast forms, that move fantastically
         To a discordant melody,
       While, like a ghastly rapid river,
         Through the pale door
       A hideous throng rush out forever
         And laugh- but smile no more.

                    -THE END-
.
                                      1850

                  HOP-FROG OR THE EIGHT CHAINED OURANG-OUTANGS

                               by Edgar Allan Poe

  I NEVER knew anyone so keenly alive to a joke as the king was. He
seemed to live only for joking. To tell a good story of the joke kind,
and to tell it well, was the surest road to his favor. Thus it
happened that his seven ministers were all noted for their
accomplishments as jokers. They all took after the king, too, in being
large, corpulent, oily men, as well as inimitable jokers. Whether
people grow fat by joking, or whether there is something in fat itself
which predisposes to a joke, I have never been quite able to
determine; but certain it is that a lean joker is a rara avis in
terris.

  About the refinements, or, as he called them, the 'ghost' of wit,
the king troubled himself very little. He had an especial admiration
for breadth in a jest, and would often put up with length, for the
sake of it. Over-niceties wearied him. He would have preferred
Rabelais' 'Gargantua' to the 'Zadig' of Voltaire: and, upon the whole,
practical jokes suited his taste far better than verbal ones.

  At the date of my narrative, professing jesters had not altogether
gone out of fashion at court. Several of the great continental
'powers' still retain their 'fools,' who wore motley, with caps and
bells, and who were expected to be always ready with sharp witticisms,
at a moment's notice, in consideration of the crumbs that fell from
the royal table.

  Our king, as a matter of course, retained his 'fool.' The fact is,
he required something in the way of folly- if only to counterbalance
the heavy wisdom of the seven wise men who were his ministers- not
to mention himself.

  His fool, or professional jester, was not only a fool, however.
His value was trebled in the eyes of the king, by the fact of his
being also a dwarf and a cripple. Dwarfs were as common at court, in
those days, as fools; and many monarchs would have found it
difficult to get through their days (days are rather longer at court
than elsewhere) without both a jester to laugh with, and a dwarf to
laugh at. But, as I have already observed, your jesters, in
ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, are fat, round, and unwieldy- so
that it was no small source of self-gratulation with our king that, in
Hop-Frog (this was the fool's name), he possessed a triplicate
treasure in one person.

  I believe the name 'Hop-Frog' was not that given to the dwarf by his
sponsors at baptism, but it was conferred upon him, by general consent
of the several ministers, on account of his inability to walk as other
men do. In fact, Hop-Frog could only get along by a sort of
interjectional gait- something between a leap and a wriggle- a
movement that afforded illimitable amusement, and of course
consolation, to the king, for (notwithstanding the protuberance of his
stomach and a constitutional swelling of the head) the king, by his
whole court, was accounted a capital figure.

  But although Hop-Frog, through the distortion of his legs, could
move only with great pain and difficulty along a road or floor, the
prodigious muscular power which nature seemed to have bestowed upon
his arms, by way of compensation for deficiency in the lower limbs,
enabled him to perform many feats of wonderful dexterity, where
trees or ropes were in question, or any thing else to climb. At such
exercises he certainly much more resembled a squirrel, or a small
monkey, than a frog.

  I am not able to say, with precision, from what country Hop-Frog
originally came. It was from some barbarous region, however, that no
person ever heard of- a vast distance from the court of our king.
Hop-Frog, and a young girl very little less dwarfish than himself
(although of exquisite proportions, and a marvellous dancer), had been
forcibly carried off from their respective homes in adjoining
provinces, and sent as presents to the king, by one of his
ever-victorious generals.

  Under these circumstances, it is not to be wondered at that a
close intimacy arose between the two little captives. Indeed, they
soon became sworn friends. Hop-Frog, who, although he made a great
deal of sport, was by no means popular, had it not in his power to
render Trippetta many services; but she, on account of her grace and
exquisite beauty (although a dwarf), was universally admired and
petted; so she possessed much influence; and never failed to use it,
whenever she could, for the benefit of Hop-Frog.

  On some grand state occasion- I forgot what- the king determined
to have a masquerade, and whenever a masquerade or any thing of that
kind, occurred at our court, then the talents, both of Hop-Frog and
Trippetta were sure to be called into play. Hop-Frog, in especial, was
so inventive in the way of getting up pageants, suggesting novel
characters, and arranging costumes, for masked balls, that nothing
could be done, it seems, without his assistance.

  The night appointed for the fete had arrived. A gorgeous hall had
been fitted up, under Trippetta's eye, with every kind of device which
could possibly give eclat to a masquerade. The whole court was in a
fever of expectation. As for costumes and characters, it might well be
supposed that everybody had come to a decision on such points. Many
had made up their minds (as to what roles they should assume) a
week, or even a month, in advance; and, in fact, there was not a
particle of indecision anywhere- except in the case of the king and
his seven minsters. Why they hesitated I never could tell, unless they
did it by way of a joke. More probably, they found it difficult, on
account of being so fat, to make up their minds. At all events, time
flew; and, as a last resort they sent for Trippetta and Hop-Frog.

  When the two little friends obeyed the summons of the king they
found him sitting at his wine with the seven members of his cabinet
council; but the monarch appeared to be in a very ill humor. He knew
that Hop-Frog was not fond of wine, for it excited the poor cripple
almost to madness; and madness is no comfortable feeling. But the king
loved his practical jokes, and took pleasure in forcing Hop-Frog to
drink and (as the king called it) 'to be merry.'

  "Come here, Hop-Frog," said he, as the jester and his friend entered
the room; "swallow this bumper to the health of your absent friends,
[here Hop-Frog sighed,] and then let us have the benefit of your
invention. We want characters- characters, man- something novel- out
of the way. We are wearied with this everlasting sameness. Come,
drink! the wine will brighten your wits."

  Hop-Frog endeavored, as usual, to get up a jest in reply to these
advances from the king; but the effort was too much. It happened to be
the poor dwarf's birthday, and the command to drink to his 'absent
friends' forced the tears to his eyes. Many large, bitter drops fell
into the goblet as he took it, humbly, from the hand of the tyrant.

  "Ah! ha! ha!" roared the latter, as the dwarf reluctantly drained
the beaker.- "See what a glass of good wine can do! Why, your eyes are
shining already!"

  Poor fellow! his large eyes gleamed, rather than shone; for the
effect of wine on his excitable brain was not more powerful than
instantaneous. He placed the goblet nervously on the table, and looked
round upon the company with a half- insane stare. They all seemed
highly amused at the success of the king's 'joke.'

  "And now to business," said the prime minister, a very fat man.

  "Yes," said the King; "Come lend us your assistance. Characters,
my fine fellow; we stand in need of characters- all of us- ha! ha!
ha!" and as this was seriously meant for a joke, his laugh was
chorused by the seven.

  Hop-Frog also laughed although feebly and somewhat vacantly.

  "Come, come," said the king, impatiently, "have you nothing to
suggest?"

  "I am endeavoring to think of something novel," replied the dwarf,
abstractedly, for he was quite bewildered by the wine.

  "Endeavoring!" cried the tyrant, fiercely; "what do you mean by
that? Ah, I perceive. You are Sulky, and want more wine. Here, drink
this!" and he poured out another goblet full and offered it to the
cripple, who merely gazed at it, gasping for breath.

  "Drink, I say!" shouted the monster, "or by the fiends-"

  The dwarf hesitated. The king grew purple with rage. The courtiers
smirked. Trippetta, pale as a corpse, advanced to the monarch's
seat, and, falling on her knees before him, implored him to spare
her friend.

  The tyrant regarded her, for some moments, in evident wonder at
her audacity. He seemed quite at a loss what to do or say- how most
becomingly to express his indignation. At last, without uttering a
syllable, he pushed her violently from him, and threw the contents
of the brimming goblet in her face.

  The poor girl got up the best she could, and, not daring even to
sigh, resumed her position at the foot of the table.

  There was a dead silence for about half a minute, during which the
falling of a leaf, or of a feather, might have been heard. It was
interrupted by a low, but harsh and protracted grating sound which
seemed to come at once from every corner of the room.

  "What- what- what are you making that noise for?" demanded the king,
turning furiously to the dwarf.

  The latter seemed to have recovered, in great measure, from his
intoxication, and looking fixedly but quietly into the tyrant's
face, merely ejaculated:

  "I- I? How could it have been me?"

  "The sound appeared to come from without," observed one of the
courtiers. "I fancy it was the parrot at the window, whetting his bill
upon his cage-wires."

  "True," replied the monarch, as if much relieved by the
suggestion; "but, on the honor of a knight, I could have sworn that it
was the gritting of this vagabond's teeth."

  Hereupon the dwarf laughed (the king was too confirmed a joker to
object to any one's laughing), and displayed a set of large, powerful,
and very repulsive teeth. Moreover, he avowed his perfect
willingness to swallow as much wine as desired. The monarch was
pacified; and having drained another bumper with no very perceptible
ill effect, Hop-Frog entered at once, and with spirit, into the
plans for the masquerade.

  "I cannot tell what was the association of idea," observed he,
very tranquilly, and as if he had never tasted wine in his life,
"but just after your majesty, had struck the girl and thrown the
wine in her face- just after your majesty had done this, and while the
parrot was making that odd noise outside the window, there came into
my mind a capital diversion- one of my own country frolics- often
enacted among us, at our masquerades: but here it will be new
altogether. Unfortunately, however, it requires a company of eight
persons and-"

  "Here we are!" cried the king, laughing at his acute discovery of
the coincidence; "eight to a fraction- I and my seven ministers. Come!
what is the diversion?"

  "We call it," replied the cripple, "the Eight Chained
Ourang-Outangs, and it really is excellent sport if well enacted."

  "We will enact it," remarked the king, drawing himself up, and
lowering his eyelids.

  "The beauty of the game," continued Hop-Frog, "lies in the fright it
occasions among the women."

  "Capital!" roared in chorus the monarch and his ministry.

  "I will equip you as ourang-outangs," proceeded the dwarf; "leave
all that to me. The resemblance shall be so striking, that the company
of masqueraders will take you for real beasts- and of course, they
will be as much terrified as astonished."

  "Oh, this is exquisite!" exclaimed the king. "Hop-Frog! I will
make a man of you."

  "The chains are for the purpose of increasing the confusion by their
jangling. You are supposed to have escaped, en masse, from your
keepers. Your majesty cannot conceive the effect produced, at a
masquerade, by eight chained ourang-outangs, imagined to be real
ones by most of the company; and rushing in with savage cries, among
the crowd of delicately and gorgeously habited men and women. The
contrast is inimitable!"

  "It must be," said the king: and the council arose hurriedly (as
it was growing late), to put in execution the scheme of Hop-Frog.

  His mode of equipping the party as ourang-outangs was very simple,
but effective enough for his purposes. The animals in question had, at
the epoch of my story, very rarely been seen in any part of the
civilized world; and as the imitations made by the dwarf were
sufficiently beast-like and more than sufficiently hideous, their
truthfulness to nature was thus thought to be secured.

  The king and his ministers were first encased in tight-fitting
stockinet shirts and drawers. They were then saturated with tar. At
this stage of the process, some one of the party suggested feathers;
but the suggestion was at once overruled by the dwarf, who soon
convinced the eight, by ocular demonstration, that the hair of such
a brute as the ourang-outang was much more efficiently represented
by flu. A thick coating of the latter was accordingly plastered upon
the coating of tar. A long chain was now procured. First, it was
passed about the waist of the king, and tied, then about another of
the party, and also tied; then about all successively, in the same
manner. When this chaining arrangement was complete, and the party
stood as far apart from each other as possible, they formed a
circle; and to make all things appear natural, Hop-Frog passed the
residue of the chain in two diameters, at right angles, across the
circle, after the fashion adopted, at the present day, by those who
capture Chimpanzees, or other large apes, in Borneo.

  The grand saloon in which the masquerade was to take place, was a
circular room, very lofty, and receiving the light of the sun only
through a single window at top. At night (the season for which the
apartment was especially designed) it was illuminated principally by a
large chandelier, depending by a chain from the centre of the
sky-light, and lowered, or elevated, by means of a counter-balance
as usual; but (in order not to look unsightly) this latter passed
outside the cupola and over the roof.

  The arrangements of the room had been left to Trippetta's
superintendence; but, in some particulars, it seems, she had been
guided by the calmer judgment of her friend the dwarf. At his
suggestion it was that, on this occasion, the chandelier was
removed. Its waxen drippings (which, in weather so warm, it was
quite impossible to prevent) would have been seriously detrimental
to the rich dresses of the guests, who, on account of the crowded
state of the saloon, could not all be expected to keep from out its
centre; that is to say, from under the chandelier. Additional
sconces were set in various parts of the hall, out of the war, and a
flambeau, emitting sweet odor, was placed in the right hand of each of
the Caryatides that stood against the wall- some fifty or sixty
altogether.

  The eight ourang-outangs, taking Hop-Frog's advice, waited patiently
until midnight (when the room was thoroughly filled with masqueraders)
before making their appearance. No sooner had the clock ceased
striking, however, than they rushed, or rather rolled in, all
together- for the impediments of their chains caused most of the party
to fall, and all to stumble as they entered.

  The excitement among the masqueraders was prodigious, and filled the
heart of the king with glee. As had been anticipated, there were not a
few of the guests who supposed the ferocious-looking creatures to be
beasts of some kind in reality, if not precisely ourang-outangs.
Many of the women swooned with affright; and had not the king taken
the precaution to exclude all weapons from the saloon, his party might
soon have expiated their frolic in their blood. As it was, a general
rush was made for the doors; but the king had ordered them to be
locked immediately upon his entrance; and, at the dwarf's
suggestion, the keys had been deposited with him.

  While the tumult was at its height, and each masquerader attentive
only to his own safety (for, in fact, there was much real danger
from the pressure of the excited crowd), the chain by which the
chandelier ordinarily hung, and which had been drawn up on its
removal, might have been seen very gradually to descend, until its
hooked extremity came within three feet of the floor.

  Soon after this, the king and his seven friends having reeled
about the hall in all directions, found themselves, at length, in
its centre, and, of course, in immediate contact with the chain. While
they were thus situated, the dwarf, who had followed noiselessly at
their heels, inciting them to keep up the commotion, took hold of
their own chain at the intersection of the two portions which
crossed the circle diametrically and at right angles. Here, with the
rapidity of thought, he inserted the hook from which the chandelier
had been wont to depend; and, in an instant, by some unseen agency,
the chandelier-chain was drawn so far upward as to take the hook out
of reach, and, as an inevitable consequence, to drag the
ourang-outangs together in close connection, and face to face.

  The masqueraders, by this time, had recovered, in some measure, from
their alarm; and, beginning to regard the whole matter as a
well-contrived pleasantry, set up a loud shout of laughter at the
predicament of the apes.

  "Leave them to me!" now screamed Hop-Frog, his shrill voice making
itself easily heard through all the din. "Leave them to me. I fancy
I know them. If I can only get a good look at them, I can soon tell
who they are."

  Here, scrambling over the heads of the crowd, he managed to get to
the wall; when, seizing a flambeau from one of the Caryatides, he
returned, as he went, to the centre of the room-leaping, with the
agility of a monkey, upon the kings head, and thence clambered a few
feet up the chain; holding down the torch to examine the group of
ourang-outangs, and still screaming: "I shall soon find out who they
are!"

  And now, while the whole assembly (the apes included) were convulsed
with laughter, the jester suddenly uttered a shrill whistle; when
the chain flew violently up for about thirty feet- dragging with it
the dismayed and struggling ourang-outangs, and leaving them suspended
in mid-air between the sky-light and the floor. Hop-Frog, clinging
to the chain as it rose, still maintained his relative position in
respect to the eight maskers, and still (as if nothing were the
matter) continued to thrust his torch down toward them, as though
endeavoring to discover who they were.

  So thoroughly astonished was the whole company at this ascent,
that a dead silence, of about a minute's duration, ensued. It was
broken by just such a low, harsh, grating sound, as had before
attracted the attention of the king and his councillors when the
former threw the wine in the face of Trippetta. But, on the present
occasion, there could be no question as to whence the sound issued. It
came from the fang- like teeth of the dwarf, who ground them and
gnashed them as he foamed at the mouth, and glared, with an expression
of maniacal rage, into the upturned countenances of the king and his
seven companions.

  "Ah, ha!" said at length the infuriated jester. "Ah, ha! I begin
to see who these people are now!" Here, pretending to scrutinize the
king more closely, he held the flambeau to the flaxen coat which
enveloped him, and which instantly burst into a sheet of vivid
flame. In less than half a minute the whole eight ourang-outangs
were blazing fiercely, amid the shrieks of the multitude who gazed
at them from below, horror-stricken, and without the power to render
them the slightest assistance.

  At length the flames, suddenly increasing in virulence, forced the
jester to climb higher up the chain, to be out of their reach; and, as
he made this movement, the crowd again sank, for a brief instant, into
silence. The dwarf seized his opportunity, and once more spoke:

  "I now see distinctly." he said, "what manner of people these
maskers are. They are a great king and his seven privy-councillors,- a
king who does not scruple to strike a defenceless girl and his seven
councillors who abet him in the outrage. As for myself, I am simply
Hop-Frog, the jester- and this is my last jest."

  Owing to the high combustibility of both the flax and the tar to
which it adhered, the dwarf had scarcely made an end of his brief
speech before the work of vengeance was complete. The eight corpses
swung in their chains, a fetid, blackened, hideous, and
indistinguishable mass. The cripple hurled his torch at them,
clambered leisurely to the ceiling, and disappeared through the
sky-light.

  It is supposed that Trippetta, stationed on the roof of the
saloon, had been the accomplice of her friend in his fiery revenge,
and that, together, they effected their escape to their own country:
for neither was seen again.

                            THE END
.
                                      1835
                                      HYMN
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
HYMN

       At morn- at noon- at twilight dim-
       Maria! thou hast heard my hymn!
       In joy and woe- in good and ill-
       Mother of God, be with me still!
       When the hours flew brightly by,
       And not a cloud obscured the sky,
       My soul, lest it should truant be,
       Thy grace did guide to thine and thee;
       Now, when storms of Fate o'ercast
       Darkly my Present and my Past,
       Let my Future radiant shine
       With sweet hopes of thee and thine!

-                  -THE END-
.
                                      1831
                                    ISRAFEL
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
ISRAFEL

       In Heaven a spirit doth dwell
         "Whose heart-strings are a lute";
       None sing so wildly well
       As the angel Israfel,
       And the giddy stars (so legends tell),
       Ceasing their hymns, attend the spell
         Of his voice, all mute.

       Tottering above
         In her highest noon,
         The enamored moon
       Blushes with love,
         While, to listen, the red levin
         (With the rapid Pleiads, even,
         Which were seven,)
         Pauses in Heaven.

       And they say (the starry choir
         And the other listening things)
       That Israfeli's fire
       Is owing to that lyre
         By which he sits and sings-
       The trembling living wire
         Of those unusual strings.

       But the skies that angel trod,
         Where deep thoughts are a duty-
       Where Love's a grown-up God-
         Where the Houri glances are
       Imbued with all the beauty
         Which we worship in a star.

       Therefore thou art not wrong,
         Israfeli, who despisest
       An unimpassioned song;
       To thee the laurels belong,
         Best bard, because the wisest!
       Merrily live, and long!

       The ecstasies above
         With thy burning measures suit-
       Thy grief, thy joy, thy hate, thy love,
         With the fervor of thy lute-
         Well may the stars be mute!

       Yes, Heaven is thine; but this
         Is a world of sweets and sours;
         Our flowers are merely- flowers,
       And the shadow of thy perfect bliss
         Is the sunshine of ours.

       If I could dwell
       Where Israfel
         Hath dwelt, and he where I,
       He might not sing so wildly well
         A mortal melody,
       While a bolder note than this might swell
       From my lyre within the sky.

                 -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                                THE LAKE. TO --
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

       In spring of youth it was my lot
       To haunt of the wide world a spot
       The which I could not love the less-
       So lovely was the loneliness
       Of a wild lake, with black rock bound,
       And the tall pines that towered around.

       But when the Night had thrown her pall
       Upon that spot, as upon all,
       And the mystic wind went by
       Murmuring in melody-
       Then- ah then I would awake
       To the terror of the lone lake.

       Yet that terror was not fright,
       But a tremulous delight-
       A feeling not the jewelled mine
       Could teach or bribe me to define-
       Nor Love- although the Love were thine.

       Death was in that poisonous wave,
       And in its gulf a fitting grave
       For him who thence could solace bring
       To his lone imagining-
       Whose solitary soul could make
       An Eden of that dim lake.

                 -THE END-
.
                                      1831
                                     LENORE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
LENORE

   Ah, broken is the golden bowl! the spirit flown forever!
   Let the bell toll!- a saintly soul floats on the Stygian river;
   And, Guy de Vere, hast thou no tear?- weep now or nevermore!
   See! on yon drear and rigid bier low lies thy love, Lenore!
   Come! let the burial rite be read- the funeral song be sung!-
   An anthem for the queenliest dead that ever died so young-
   A dirge for her the doubly dead in that she died so young.

   "Wretches! ye loved her for her wealth and hated her for her pride,
   And when she fell in feeble health, ye blessed her- that she died!
   How shall the ritual, then, be read?- the requiem how be sung
   By you- by yours, the evil eye,- by yours, the slanderous tongue
   That did to death the innocence that died, and died so young?"

   Peccavimus; but rave not thus! and let a Sabbath song
   Go up to God so solemnly the dead may feel no wrong.
   The sweet Lenore hath "gone before," with Hope, that flew beside,
   Leaving thee wild for the dear child that should have been thy
        bride.
   For her, the fair and debonair, that now so lowly lies,
   The life upon her yellow hair but not within her eyes
   The life still there, upon her hair- the death upon her eyes.

   "Avaunt! avaunt! from fiends below, the indignant ghost is riven-
   From Hell unto a high estate far up within the Heaven-
   From grief and groan, to a golden throne, beside the King of
        Heaven!
   Let no bell toll, then,- lest her soul, amid its hallowed mirth,
   Should catch the note as it doth float up from the damned Earth!
   And I!- to-night my heart is light!- no dirge will I upraise,
   But waft the angel on her flight with a Paean of old days!"

                             -THE END-
.
                                      1850

                               THE POWER OF WORDS

                               by Edgar Allan Poe

  OINOS. Pardon, Agathos, the weakness of a spirit new-fledged with
immortality!

  AGATHOS. You have spoken nothing, my Oinos, for which pardon is to
be demanded. Not even here is knowledge thing of intuition. For
wisdom, ask of the angels freely, that it may be given!

  OINOS. But in this existence, I dreamed that I should be at once
cognizant of all things, and thus at once be happy in being
cognizant of all.

  AGATHOS. Ah, not in knowledge is happiness, but in the acquisition
of knowledge! In for ever knowing, we are for ever blessed; but to
know all were the curse of a fiend.

  OINOS. But does not The Most High know all?

  AGATHOS. That (since he is The Most Happy) must be still the one
thing unknown even to Him.

  OINOS. But, since we grow hourly in knowledge, must not at last
all things be known?

  AGATHOS. Look down into the abysmal distances!- attempt to force the
gaze down the multitudinous vistas of the stars, as we sweep slowly
through them thus- and thus- and thus! Even the spiritual vision, is
it not at all points arrested by the continuous golden walls of the
universe?- the walls of the myriads of the shining bodies that mere
number has appeared to blend into unity?

  OINOS. I clearly perceive that the infinity of matter is no dream.

  AGATHOS. There are no dreams in Aidenn- but it is here whispered
that, of this infinity of matter, the sole purpose is to afford
infinite springs, at which the soul may allay the thirst to know,
which is for ever unquenchable within it- since to quench it, would be
to extinguish the soul's self. Question me then, my Oinos, freely
and without fear. Come! we will leave to the left the loud harmony
of the Pleiades, and swoop outward from the throne into the starry
meadows beyond Orion, where, for pansies and violets, and heart's-
ease, are the beds of the triplicate and triple- tinted suns.

  OINOS. And now, Agathos, as we proceed, instruct me!- speak to me in
the earth's familiar tones. I understand not what you hinted to me,
just now, of the modes or of the method of what, during mortality,
we were accustomed to call Creation. Do you mean to say that the
Creator is not God?

  AGATHOS. I mean to say that the Deity does not create.

  OINOS. Explain.

  AGATHOS. In the beginning only, he created. The seeming creatures
which are now, throughout the universe, so perpetually springing
into being, can only be considered as the mediate or indirect, not
as the direct or immediate results of the Divine creative power.

  OINOS. Among men, my Agathos, this idea would be considered
heretical in the extreme.

  AGATHOS. Among angels, my Oinos, it is seen to be simply true.

  OINOS. I can comprehend you thus far- that certain operations of
what we term Nature, or the natural laws, will, under certain
conditions, give rise to that which has all the appearance of
creation. Shortly before the final overthrow of the earth, there were,
I well remember, many very successful experiments in what some
philosophers were weak enough to denominate the creation of
animalculae.

  AGATHOS. The cases of which you speak were, in fact, instances of
the secondary creation- and of the only species of creation which
has ever been, since the first word spoke into existence the first
law.

  OINOS. Are not the starry worlds that, from the abyss of
nonentity, burst hourly forth into the heavens- are not these stars,
Agathos, the immediate handiwork of the King?

  AGATHOS. Let me endeavor, my Oinos, to lead you, step by step, to
the conception I intend. You are well aware that, as no thought can
perish, so no act is without infinite result. We moved our hands,
for example, when we were dwellers on the earth, and, in so doing,
gave vibration to the atmosphere which engirdled it. This vibration
was indefinitely extended, till it gave impulse to every particle of
the earth's air, which thenceforward, and for ever, was actuated by
the one movement of the hand. This fact the mathematicians of our
globe well knew. They made the special effects, indeed, wrought in the
fluid by special impulses, the subject of exact calculation- so that
it became easy to determine in what precise period an impulse of given
extent would engirdle the orb, and impress (for ever) every atom of
the atmosphere circumambient. Retrograding, they found no
difficulty, from a given effect, under given conditions, in
determining the value of the original impulse. Now the
mathematicians who saw that the results of any given impulse were
absolutely endless- and who saw that a portion of these results were
accurately traceable through the agency of algebraic analysis- who
saw, too, the facility of the retrogradation- these men saw, at the
same time, that this species of analysis itself, had within itself a
capacity for indefinite progress- that there were no bounds
conceivable to its advancement and applicability, except within the
intellect of him who advanced or applied it. But at this point our
mathematicians paused.

  OINOS. And why, Agathos, should they have proceeded?

  AGATHOS. Because there were some considerations of deep interest
beyond. It was deducible from what they knew, that to a being of
infinite understanding- one to whom the perfection of the algebraic
analysis lay unfolded- there could be no difficulty in tracing every
impulse given the air- and the ether through the air- to the
remotest consequences at any even infinitely remote epoch of time.
It is indeed demonstrable that every such impulse given the air, must,
in the end, impress every individual thing that exists within the
universe;- and the being of infinite understanding- the being whom
we have imagined- might trace the remote undulations of the impulse-
trace them upward and onward in their influences upon all particles of
an matter- upward and onward for ever in their modifications of old
forms- or, in other words, in their creation of new- until he found
them reflected- unimpressive at last- back from the throne of the
Godhead. And not only could such a thing do this, but at any epoch,
should a given result be afforded him- should one of these
numberless comets, for example, be presented to his inspection- he
could have no difficulty in determining, by the analytic
retrogradation, to what original impulse it was due. This power of
retrogradation in its absolute fulness and perfection- this faculty of
referring at all epochs, all effects to all causes- is of course the
prerogative of the Deity alone- but in every variety of degree,
short of the absolute perfection, is the power itself exercised by the
whole host of the Angelic intelligences.

  OINOS. But you speak merely of impulses upon the air.

  AGATHOS. In speaking of the air, I referred only to the earth; but
the general proposition has reference to impulses upon the ether-
which, since it pervades, and alone pervades all space, is thus the
great medium of creation.

  OINOS. Then all motion, of whatever nature, creates?

  AGATHOS. It must: but a true philosophy has long taught that the
source of all motion is thought- and the source of all thought is-

  OINOS. God.

  AGATHOS. I have spoken to you, Oinos, as to a child of the fair
Earth which lately perished- of impulses upon the atmosphere of the
Earth.

  OINOS. You did.

  AGATHOS. And while I thus spoke, did there not cross your mind
some thought of the physical power of words? Is not every word an
impulse on the air?

  OINOS. But why, Agathos, do you weep- and why, oh why do your
wings droop as we hover above this fair star- which is the greenest
and yet most terrible of all we have encountered in our flight? Its
brilliant flowers look like a fairy dream- but its fierce volcanoes
like the passions of a turbulent heart.

  AGATHOS. They are!- they are! This wild star- it is now three
centuries since, with clasped hands, and with streaming eyes, at the
feet of my beloved- I spoke it- with a few passionate sentences-
into birth. Its brilliant flowers are the dearest of all unfulfilled
dreams, and its raging volcanoes are the passions of the most
turbulent and unhallowed of hearts.

                             THE END
.
                                      1845
                                   THE RAVEN
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

    Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
  Over many a quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore,
    While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
   As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
  "'Tis some visitor," I muttered, "tapping at my chamber door-
                Only this, and nothing more."

    Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December,
  And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
    Eagerly I wished the morrow;- vainly I had sought to borrow
    From my books surcease of sorrow- sorrow for the lost Lenore-
  For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore-
                Nameless here for evermore.

    And the silken sad uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
  Thrilled me- filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
    So that now, to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating,
    "'Tis some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door-
  Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door;-
                This it is, and nothing more."

    Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
  "Sir," said I, "or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
    But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
    And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door,
  That I scarce was sure I heard you"- here I opened wide the door;-
                Darkness there, and nothing more.

    Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering,
        fearing,
  Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortals ever dared to dream before;
    But the silence was unbroken, and the stillness gave no token,
    And the only word there spoken was the whispered word, "Lenore!"
  This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word, "Lenore!"-
                Merely this, and nothing more.

    Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
   Soon again I heard a tapping somewhat louder than before.
    "Surely," said I, "surely that is something at my window lattice:
    Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore-
  Let my heart be still a moment and this mystery explore;-
                'Tis the wind and nothing more."

    Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and
        flutter,
  In there stepped a stately raven of the saintly days of yore;
    Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed
        he;
    But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door-
  Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door-
                Perched, and sat, and nothing more.

   Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
  By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore.
   "Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou," I said, "art sure no
        craven,
   Ghastly grim and ancient raven wandering from the Nightly shore-
  Tell me what thy lordly name is on the Night's Plutonian shore!"
                Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

    Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
  Though its answer little meaning- little relevancy bore;
    For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
    Ever yet was blest with seeing bird above his chamber door-
  Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
                With such name as "Nevermore."

    But the raven, sitting lonely on the placid bust, spoke only
  That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
    Nothing further then he uttered- not a feather then he fluttered-
    Till I scarcely more than muttered, "other friends have flown
        before-
  On the morrow he will leave me, as my hopes have flown before."
                Then the bird said, "Nevermore."

     Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
  "Doubtless," said I, "what it utters is its only stock and store,
     Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
     Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore-
  Till the dirges of his Hope that melancholy burden bore
                Of 'Never- nevermore'."

    But the Raven still beguiling all my fancy into smiling,
  Straight I wheeled a cushioned seat in front of bird, and bust and
        door;
    Then upon the velvet sinking, I betook myself to linking
    Fancy unto fancy, thinking what this ominous bird of yore-
  What this grim, ungainly, ghastly, gaunt and ominous bird of yore
                Meant in croaking "Nevermore."

    This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
  To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burned into my bosom's core;
    This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
    On the cushion's velvet lining that the lamplight gloated o'er,
  But whose velvet violet lining with the lamplight gloating o'er,
                She shall press, ah, nevermore!

    Then methought the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
  Swung by Seraphim whose footfalls tinkled on the tufted floor.
    "Wretch," I cried, "thy God hath lent thee- by these angels he
        hath sent thee
    Respite- respite and nepenthe, from thy memories of Lenore!
  Quaff, oh quaff this kind nepenthe and forget this lost Lenore!"
                Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

    "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil!- prophet still, if bird or
        devil!-
  Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
    Desolate yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted-
    On this home by horror haunted- tell me truly, I implore-
  Is there- is there balm in Gilead?- tell me- tell me, I implore!"
                Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

    "Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil- prophet still, if bird or
        devil!
  By that Heaven that bends above us- by that God we both adore-
    Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
    It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore-
  Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore."
                Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

    "Be that word our sign in parting, bird or fiend," I shrieked,
        upstarting-
  "Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore!
    Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
    Leave my loneliness unbroken!- quit the bust above my door!
  Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my
        door!"
               Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

    And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
  On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
    And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon's that is dreaming,
    And the lamplight o'er him streaming throws his shadow on the
        floor;
  And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
                Shall be lifted- nevermore!

                             -THE END-
.
                                      1829
                                    ROMANCE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
ROMANCE

      Romance, who loves to nod and sing,
      With drowsy head and folded wing,
      Among the green leaves as they shake
      Far down within some shadowy lake,
      To me a painted paroquet
      Hath been- a most familiar bird-
      Taught me my alphabet to say-
      To lisp my very earliest word
      While in the wild wood I did lie,
      A child- with a most knowing eye.

      Of late, eternal Condor years
      So shake the very Heaven on high
      With tumult as they thunder by,
      I have no time for idle cares
      Through gazing on the unquiet sky.
      And when an hour with calmer wings
      Its down upon my spirit flings-
      That little time with lyre and rhyme
      To while away- forbidden things!
      My heart would feel to be a crime
      Unless it trembled with the strings.

                 -THE END-
.
                                      1835
                             SCENES FROM "POLITIAN"
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

                  DRAMATIS PERSONAE

  POLITIAN, Earl of Leicester.        A MONK.
  DI BROGLIO, a Roman Duke.           LALAGE
  COUNT CASTIGLIONE, his son.         ALESSANDRA, betrothed to
  BALDAZZAR, Duke of Surrey,              Castiglione.
   Friend to Politian.                JACINTA, maid to Lalage.

                The Scene lies in Rome
                         I.

                ROME- A Hall in a Palace

              ALESSANDRA and CASTIGLIONE.

                      ALESSANDRA
  Thou art sad, Castiglione.

                      CASTIGLIONE
                            Sad!- not I.
  Oh, I'm the happiest, happiest man in Rome!
  A few days more, thou knowest, my Alessandra,
  Will make thee mine. Oh, I am very happy!

                      ALESSANDRA.
  Methinks thou hast a singular way of showing
  Thy happiness!- what ails thee, cousin of mine?
  Why didst thou sigh so deeply?

                      CASTIGLIONE
  I was not conscious of it. It is a fashion,
  A silly- a most silly fashion I have
  When I am very happy. Did I sigh?                         (Sighing)

                      ALESSANDRA
  Thou didst. Thou art not well. Thou hast indulged
  Too much of late, and I am vexed to see it.
  Late hours and wine, Castiglione,- these
  Will ruin thee! thou art already altered-
  Thy looks are haggard- nothing so wears away
  The constitution as late hours and wine.

                      CASTIGLIONE (musing)
  Nothing, fair cousin, nothing- not even deep sorrow-
  Wears it away like evil hours and wine.
  I will amend.

                      ALESSANDRA
           Do it! I would have thee drop
  Thy riotous company, too- fellows low born-
  Ill suit the like with old Di Broglio's heir
  And Alessandra's husband.

                      CASTIGLIONE
                      I will drop them.

                      ALESSANDRA
  Thou wilt- thou must. Attend thou also more
  To thy dress and equippage- they are over plain
  For thy lofty rank and fashion- much depends
  Upon appearances.

                      CASTIGLIONE
              I'll see to it.

                      ALESSANDRA
  Then see to it!- pay more attention, sir,
  To a becoming carriage- much thou wantest
  In dignity.

                      CASTIGLIONE
          Much, much, oh! much I want
  In proper dignity.

                      ALESSANDRA (haughtily)
                 Thou mockest me, sir.

                      CASTIGLIONE (abstractedly)
  Sweet, gentle Lalage!

                      ALESSANDRA
                Heard I aright?
    speak to him- he speaks of Lalage!
  Sir Count! (places her hand on his shoulder) what art thou dreaming?
        (aside) He's not well!
  What ails thee, sir?

                      CASTIGLIONE (starting)
              Cousin! fair cousin!- madam!
  I crave thy pardon- indeed I am not well-
  Your hand from off my shoulder, if you please.
  This air is most oppressive!- Madam- the Duke!
                                                   (Enter DI BROGLIO)

                      DI BROGLIO
  My son, I've news for thee!- hey?- what's the matter? (observing
        Alessandra)
  I' the pouts? Kiss her, Castiglione! kiss her,
  You dog! and make it up, I say, this minute!
  I've news for you both. Politian is expected
  Hourly in Rome- Politian, Earl of Leicester!
  We'll have him at the wedding. 'Tis his first visit
  To the imperial city.

                      ALESSANDRA
               What! Politian
  Of Britain, Earl of Leicester?

                      DI BROGLIO
                      The same, my love.
  We'll have him at the wedding. A man quite young
  In years, but grey in fame. I have not seen him,
  But Rumour speaks of him as of a prodigy
  Preeminent in arts and arms, and wealth,
  As of one who entered madly into life,
  Drinking the cup of pleasure to the dregs.
  And high descent. We'll have him at the wedding.

                      ALESSANDRA
  I have heard much of this Politian.
  Gay, volatile and giddy- is he not?
  And little given to thinking.

                      DI BROGLIO
                      Far from it, love.
  No branch, they say, of all philosophy
  So deep abstruse he has not mastered it.
  Learned as few are learned.

                      ALESSANDRA
                      'Tis very strange!
  I have known men have seen Politian
  And sought his company. They speak of him
  As of one who entered madly into life,
  Drinking the cup of pleasure to the dregs.

                      CASTIGLIONE
  Ridiculous! Now I have seen Politian
  And know him well- nor learned nor he.
  He is a dreamer, and a man shut out
  From common passions.

                      DI BROGLIO
                   Children, we disagree.
  Let us go forth and taste the fragrant air
  Of the garden. Did I dream, or did I hear
  Politian was a melancholy man?                             (Exeunt)
                          II

  ROME- A Lady's apartment, with a window open and looking into a
    garden. LALAGE, in deep mourning, reading at a table on which lie
    some books and a hand mirror. In the background JACINTA (a servant
    maid) leans carelessly upon a chair.

                      LALAGE.
  Jacinta, is it thou?

                      JACINTA (pertly)
                 Yes, ma'am, I'm here.

                      LALAGE.
  I did not know, Jacinta, you were in waiting.
  Sit down!- Let not my presence trouble you-
  Sit down!- for I am humble, most humble.

                      JACINTA (aside)
                                   'Tis time.

    (JACINTA seats herself in a side-long manner upon the chair,
       resting her elbows upon the back, and regarding her mistress
       with a contemptuous look. LALAGE continues to read.)

                      LALAGE
  "It in another climate, so he said,
  "Bore a bright golden flower, but not this soil!"
                         (pauses- turns over some leaves, and resumes)
  "No lingering winters there, nor snow, nor shower-
  "But Ocean ever to refresh mankind
  "Breathes the shrill spirit of the western wind."
  O, beautiful!- most beautiful- how like
  To what my fevered soul doth dream of Heaven!
  O happy land (pauses) She died!- the maiden died!
  A still more happy maiden who couldst die!
  Jacinta!
            (JACINTA returns no answer, and LALAGE presently resumes)
  Again!- a similar tale
  Told of a beauteous dame beyond the sea!
  Thus speaketh one Ferdinand in the words of the play-
  "She died full young"- one Bossola answers him-
  "I think not so- her infelicity
  "Seemed to have years too many"- Ah luckless lady!
  Jacinta! (still no answer)
                     Here 's a far sterner story,
  But like- oh, very like in its despair-
  Of that Egyptian queen, winning so easily
  A thousand hearts- losing at length her own.
  She died. Thus endeth the history- and her maids
  Lean over and weep- two gentle maids
  With gentle names- Eiros and Charmion!
  Rainbow and Dove!- Jacinta!

                      JACINTA (pettishly)
                       Madam, what is it?

                     LALAGE
  Wilt thou, my good Jacinta, be so kind
  As go down in the library and bring me
  The Holy Evangelists?

                     JACINTA
                   Pshaw!                                      (Exit)

                      LALAGE
                 If there be balm
  For the wounded spirit in Gilead it is there!
  Dew in the night-time of my bitter trouble
  Will there be found- "dew sweeter far than that
  Which hangs like chains of pearl on Hermon hill."

                 (Re-enter JACINTA, and throws a volume on the table)
  There, ma'am, 's the book. Indeed she is very troublesome.  (Aside)

                      LALAGE (astonished)
  What didst thou say, Jacinta? Have I done aught
  To grieve thee or to vex thee?- I am sorry.
  For thou hast served me long and ever been
  Trustworthy and respectful.                   (resumes her reading)

                      JACINTA (aside)
                  I can't believe
  She has any more jewels- no- no- she gave me all.

                      LALAGE
  What didst thou say, Jacinta? Now I bethink me
  Thou hast not spoken lately of thy wedding.
  How fares good Ugo?- and when is it to be?
  Can I do aught?- is there no farther aid
  Thou needest, Jacinta?

                      JACINTA
                 Is there no farther aid!
  That's meant for me (aside). I'm sure, madam, you need not
  Be always throwing those jewels in my teeth.

                      LALAGE
  Jewels! Jacinta,- now indeed, Jacinta,
  I thought not of the jewels.

                      JACINTA
                     Oh! perhaps not!
  But then I might have sworn it. After all,
  There 's Ugo says the ring is only paste,
  For he 's sure the Count Castiglione never
  Would have given a real diamond to such as you;
  And at the best I'm certain, madam, you cannot
  Have use for jewels now. But I might have sworn it.          (Exit)

      (LALAGE bursts into tears and leans her head upon the
          table- after a short pause raises it)

                      LALAGE
  Poor Lalage!- and is it come to this?
  Thy servant maid!- but courage!- 'tis but a viper
  Whom thou hast cherished to sting thee to the soul!
                                               (Taking up the mirror)
  Ha! here at least 's a friend- too much a friend
  In earlier day- a friend will not deceive thee.
  Fair mirror and true! now tell me (for thou canst)
  A tale- a pretty tale- and heed thou not
  Though it be rife with woe. It answers me.
  It speaks of sunken eyes, and wasted cheeks,
  And Beauty long deceased- remembers me
  Of Joy departed- Hope, the Seraph Hope,
  Inurned and entombed:- now, in a tone
  Low, sad, and solemn, but most audible,
  Whispers of early grave untimely yawning
  For ruined maid. Fair mirror and true- thou liest not!
  Thou hast no end to gain- no heart to break-
  Castiglione lied who said he loved-
  Thou true- he false!- false!- false!

         (While she speaks, a monk enters her apartment, and
                 approaches unobserved)

                      MONK
                           Refuge thou hast,
  Sweet daughter, in Heaven. Think of eternal things!
  Give up thy soul to penitence, and pray!

                      LALAGE (arising hurriedly)
  I cannot pray!- My soul is at war with God!
  The frightful sounds of merriment below
  Disturb my senses- go! I cannot pray-
  The sweet airs from the garden worry me!
  Thy presence grieves me- go!- thy priestly raiment
  Fills me with dread- thy ebony crucifix
  With horror and awe!

                      MONK
              Think of thy precious soul!

                      LALAGE
  Think of my early days!- think of my father
  And mother in Heaven think of our quiet home,
  And the rivulet that ran before the door!
  Think of my little sisters!- think of them!
  And think of me!- think of my trusting love
  And confidence- his vows- my ruin- think- think
  Of my unspeakable misery!- begone!
  Yet stay! yet stay!- what was it thou saidst of prayer
  And penitence? Didst thou not speak of faith
  And vows before the throne?

                      MONK
                    I did.

                      LALAGE
                          'Tis well.
  There is a vow were fitting should be made-
  A sacred vow, imperative, and urgent,
  A solemn vow!

                      MONK
        Daughter, this zeal is well.

                      LALAGE
  Father, this zeal is anything but well!
  Hast thou a crucifix fit for this thing?
  A crucifix whereon to register
  This sacred vow?                             (He hands her his own)
  Not that- Oh! no!- no!- no!                            (Shuddering)
  Not that! Not that!- I tell thee, holy man,
  Thy raiments and thy ebony cross affright me!
  Stand back! I have a crucifix myself,-
  I have a crucifix Methinks 'twere fitting
  The deed- the vow- the symbol of the deed-
  And the deed's register should tally, father!
                (Draws a cross-handled dagger, and raises it on high)
  Behold the cross wherewith a vow like mine
  Is written in Heaven!

                      MONK
                   Thy words are madness, daughter,
  And speak a purpose unholy- thy lips are livid-
  Thine eyes are wild- tempt not the wrath divine!
  Pause ere too late!- oh, be not- be not rash!
  Swear not the oath- oh, swear it not!

                      LALAGE
                            'Tis sworn!
                        III.

      An apartment in a Palace. POLITIAN and BALDAZZAR

                      BALDAZZAR
  -Arouse thee now, Politian!
  Thou must not- nay indeed, indeed, shalt not
  Give away unto these humors. Be thyself!
  Shake off the idle fancies that beset thee,
  And live, for now thou diest!

                      POLITIAN
                      Not so, Baldazzar
  Surely I live.

                      BALDAZZAR
        Politian, it doth grieve me
  To see thee thus.

                      POLITIAN
               Baldazzar, it doth grieve me
  To give thee cause for grief, my honored friend.
  Command me, sir! what wouldst thou have me do?
  At thy behest I will shake off that nature
  Which from my, forefathers I did inherit,
  Which with my mother's milk I did imbibe,
  And be no more Politician, but some other.
  Command me, sir!

                      BALDAZZAR
           To the field, then- to the field-
  To the senate or the field.

                      POLITIAN.
                   Alas! Alas!
  There is an imp would follow me even there!
  There is an imp hath followed me even there!
  There is- what voice was that?

                      BALDAZZAR
                            I heard it not.
  I heard not any voice except thine own,
  And the echo of thine own.

                      POLITIAN
                     Then I but dreamed.

                      BALDAZZAR
  Give not thy soul to dreams: the camp- the court,
  Befit thee- Fame awaits thee- Glory calls-
  And her, the trumpet-tongued, thou wilt not hear
  In hearkening to imaginary sounds
  And phantom voices.

                      POLITIAN
                  It is a phantom voice!
  Didst thou not hear it then?

                      BALDAZZAR
                      I heard it not.

                      POLITIAN
  Thou heardst it not!- Baldazaar, speak no more
  To me, Politian, of thy camps and courts.
  Oh I am sick, sick, even unto death,
  Of the hollow and high-sounding vanities
  Of the populous Earth! Bear with me yet awhile!
  We have been boys together- schoolfellows-
  And now are friends- yet shall not be so long-
  For in the eternal city thou shalt do me
  A kind and gentle office, and a Power
  A Power august, benignant and supreme-
  Shall then absolve thee of all further duties
  Unto thy friend.

                      BALDAZZAR
              Thou speakest a fearful riddle
  I will not understand.

                      POLITIAN
               Yet now as Fate
  Approaches, and the Hours are breathing low,
  The sands of Time are changed to golden grains,
  And dazzle me, Baldazzar. Alas! alas!
  I cannot die, having within my heart
  So keen a relish for the beautiful
  As hath been kindled within it. Methinks the air
  Is balmier now than it was wont to be,-
  Rich melodies are floating in the winds-
  A rarer loveliness bedecks the earth-
  And with a holier lustre the quiet moon
  Sitteth in Heaven.- Hist! hist! thou canst not say
  Thou hearest not now, Baldazzar?

                      BALDAZZAR
                         Indeed I hear not.

                      POLITIAN
  Not hear it!- listen now!- listen!- the faintest sound
  And yet the sweetest that ear ever heard!
  A lady's voice!- and sorrow in the tone!
  Baldazzar, it oppresses me like a spell!
  Again!- again!- how solemnly it falls
  Into my heart of hearts! that eloquent voice
  Surely I never heard- yet it were well
  Had I but heard it with its thrilling tones
  In earlier days!

                      BALDAZZAR
              I myself hear it now.
  Be still!- the voice, if I mistake not greatly,
  Proceeds from yonder lattice- which you may see
  Very plainly through the window- it belongs,
  Does it not? unto this palace of the Duke?
  The singer is undoubtedly beneath
  The roof of his Excellency- and perhaps
  Is even that Alessandra of whom he spoke
  As the betrothed of Castiglione,
  His son and heir.

                      POLITIAN
  Be still!- it comes again!

                      VOICE (very faintly)
            "And is thy heart so strong
            As for to leave me thus
            Who hath loved thee so long
            In wealth and woe among?
            And is thy heart so strong
            As for to leave me thus?
                Say nay- say nay!"

                      BALDAZZAR
  The song is English, and I oft have heard it
  In merry England- never so plaintively-
  Hist! hist! it comes again!

                      VOICE (more loudly)
            "Is it so strong
            As for to leave me thus
            Who hath loved thee so long
            In wealth and woe among?
            And is thy heart so strong
            As for to leave me thus?
                Say nay- say nay!"

                      BALDAZZAR
  'Tis hushed and all is still!

                      POLITIAN
                  All is not still!

                      BALDAZZAR
  Let us go down.

                      POLITIAN
          Go down, Baldazzar, go!

                      BALDAZZAR
  The hour is growing late- the Duke awaits use-
  Thy presence is expected in the hall
  Below. What ails thee, Earl Politian?

                      VOICE (distinctly)
            "Who hath loved thee so long
            In wealth and woe among,
            And is thy heart so strong?
                Say nay- say nay!"

                      BALDAZZAR
  Let us descend- 'tis time. Politian, give
  These fancies to the wind. Remember, pray,
  Your bearing lately savored much of rudeness
  Unto the Duke. Arouse thee! and remember

                      POLITIAN
  Remember? I do. lead on! I do remember.
                                                              (Going)
  Let us descend. Believe me I would give,
  Freely would give the broad lands of my earldom
  To look upon the face hidden by yon lattice-
  "To gaze upon that veiled face, and hear
  Once more that silent tongue."

                      BALDAZZAR
                         Let me beg you, sir,
  Descend with me- the Duke may be offended.
  Let us go down, I pray you.

                      VOICE (loudly)
                      Say nay!- say nay!

                      POLITIAN (aside)
  'Tis strange!- 'tis very strange- methought the voice
  Chimed in with my desires, and bade me stay!
                                             (Approaching the window)
  Sweet voice! I heed thee, and will surely stay.
  Now be this Fancy, by Heaven or be it Fate,
  Still will I not descend. Baldazzar make
  Apology unto the Duke for me;
  I go not down to-night.

                      BALDAZZAR
                  Your lordship's pleasure
  Shall be attended to. Good-night, Politian.

                      POLITIAN
  Good-night, my friend, good-night.
                         IV.

           The gardens of a Palace- Moonlight

                 LALAGE, and POLITIAN

                      LALAGE
  And dost thou speak of love
  To me, Politian?- dost thou speak of love
  To Lalage?- ah, woe- ah, woe is me!
  This mockery is most cruel- most cruel indeed!

                      POLITIAN
  Weep not! oh, sob not thus!- thy bitter tears
  Will madden me. Oh, mourn not, Lalage-
  Be comforted! I know- I know it all,
  And still I speak of love. Look at me, brightest
  And beautiful Lalage!- turn here thine eyes!
  Thou askest me if I could speak of love,
  Knowing what I know, and seeing what I have seen.
  Thou askest me that- and thus I answer thee-
  Thus on my bended knee I answer thee.                    (Kneeling)
  Sweet Lalage, I love thee- love thee- love thee;
  Thro' good and ill- thro' weal and woe I love thee.
  Not mother, with her first-born on her knee,
  Thrills with intenser love than I for thee.
  Not on God's altar, in any time or clime,
  Burned there a holier fire than burneth now
  Within my spirit for thee. And do I love?                 (Arising)
  Even for thy woes I love thee- even for thy woes-
  Thy beauty and thy woes.

                      LALAGE
                    Alas, proud Earl,
  Thou dost forget thyself, remembering me!
  How, in thy father's halls, among the maidens
  Pure and reproachless of thy princely line,
  Could the dishonored Lalage abide?
  Thy wife, and with a tainted memory-
  MY seared and blighted name, how would it tally
  With the ancestral honors of thy house,
  And with thy glory?

                       POLITIAN
                  Speak not to me of glory!
  I hate- I loathe the name; I do abhor
  The unsatisfactory and ideal thing.
  Art thou not Lalage and I Politian?
  Do I not love- art thou not beautiful-
  What need we more? Ha! glory!- now speak not of it.
  By all I hold most sacred and most solemn-
  By all my wishes now- my fears hereafter-
  By all I scorn on earth and hope in heaven-
  There is no deed I would more glory in,
  Than in thy cause to scoff at this same glory
  And trample it under foot. What matters it-
  What matters it, my fairest, and my best,
  That we go down unhonored and forgotten
  Into the dust- so we descend together.
  Descend together- and then- and then, perchance-

                      LALAGE
  Why dost thou pause, Politian?

                      POLITIAN
                          And then, perchance
  Arise together, Lalage, and roam
  The starry and quiet dwellings of the blest,
  And still-

                      LALAGE
        Why dost thou pause, Politian?

                      POLITIAN
  And still together- together.

                      LALAGE
                      Now Earl of Leicester!
  Thou lovest me, and in my heart of hearts
  I feel thou lovest me truly.

                      POLITIAN
                     Oh, Lalage!
                                     (Throwing himself upon his knee)
  And lovest thou me?

                      LALAGE
              Hist! hush! within the gloom
  Of yonder trees methought a figure passed-
  A spectral figure, solemn, and slow, and noiseless-
  Like the grim shadow Conscience, solemn and noiseless.
                                           (Walks across and returns)
  I was mistaken- 'twas but a giant bough
  Stirred by the autumn wind. Politian!

                      POLITIAN
  My Lalage- my love! why art thou moved?
  Why dost thou turn so pale? Not Conscience' self,
  Far less a shadow which thou likenest to it,
  Should shake the firm spirit thus. But the night wind
  Is chilly- and these melancholy boughs
  Throw over all things a gloom.

                      LALAGE
                       Politian!
  Thou speakest to me of love. Knowest thou the land
  With which all tongues are busy- a land new found-
  Miraculously found by one of Genoa-
  A thousand leagues within the golden west?
  A fairy land of flowers, and fruit, and sunshine,
  And crystal lakes, and over-arching forests,
  And mountains, around whose towering summits the winds
  Of Heaven untrammelled flow- which air to breathe
  Is Happiness now, and will be Freedom hereafter
  In days that are to come?

                      POLITIAN
                 O, wilt thou- wilt thou
  Fly to that Paradise- my Lalage, wilt thou
  Fly thither with me? There Care shall be forgotten,
  And Sorrow shall be no more, and Eros be all.
  And life shall then be mine, for I will live
  For thee, and in thine eyes- and thou shalt be
  No more a mourner- but the radiant Joys
  Shall wait upon thee, and the angel Hope
  Attend thee ever; and I will kneel to thee
  And worship thee, and call thee my beloved,
  My own, my beautiful, my love, my wife,
  My all;- oh, wilt thou- wilt thou, Lalage,
  Fly thither with me?

                      LALAGE
                A deed is to be done-
  Castiglione lives!

                      POLITIAN
              And he shall die!                                (Exit)

                      LALAGE (after a pause)
  And- he- shall- die!- alas!
  Castiglione die? Who spoke the words?
  Where am I?- what was it he said?- Politian!
  Thou art not gone- thou are not gone, Politian!
  I feel thou art not gone- yet dare not look,
  Lest I behold thee not; thou couldst not go
  With those words upon thy lips- O, speak to me!
  And let me hear thy voice- one word- one word,
  To say thou art not gone,- one little sentence,
  To say how thou dost scorn- how thou dost hate
  My womanly weakness. Ha! ha! thou art not gone-
  O speak to me! I knew thou wouldst not go!
  I knew thou wouldst not, couldst not, durst not go.
  Villain, thou art not gone- thou mockest me!
  And thus I clutch thee- thus!- He is gone, he is gone
  Gone- gone. Where am I?- 'tis well- 'tis very well!
  So that the blade be keen- the blow be sure,
  'Tis well, 'tis very well- alas! alas!
                          V

               The suburbs. POLITIAN alone

                      POLITIAN
  This weakness grows upon me. I am faint,
  And much I fear me ill- it will not do
  To die ere I have lived!- Stay, stay thy hand,
  O Azrael, yet awhile!- Prince of the Powers
  Of Darkness and the Tomb, O pity me!
  O pity me! let me not perish now,
  In the budding of my Paradisal Hope!
  Give me to live yet- yet a little while:
  'Tis I who pray for life- I who so late
  Demanded but to die!- what sayeth the Count?
                  (Enter BALDAZZAR)

                      BALDAZZAR
  That knowing no cause of quarrel or of feud
  Between the Earl Politian and himself.
  He doth decline your cartel.

                      POLITIAN
                      What didst thou say?
  What answer was it you brought me, good Baldazzar?
  With what excessive fragrance the zephyr comes
  Laden from yonder bowers!- a fairer day,
  Or one more worthy Italy, methinks
  No mortal eyes have seen!- what said the Count?

                      BALDAZZAR
  That he, Castiglione' not being aware
  Of any feud existing, or any cause
  Of quarrel between your lordship and himself,
  Cannot accept the challenge.

                      POLITIAN
                      It is most true-
  All this is very true. When saw you, sir,
  When saw you now, Baldazzar, in the frigid
  Ungenial Britain which we left so lately,
  A heaven so calm as this- so utterly free
  From the evil taint of clouds?- and he did say?

                      BALDAZZAR
  No more, my lord, than I have told you, sir:
  The Count Castiglione will not fight,
  Having no cause for quarrel.

                      POLITIAN
                      Now this is true-
  All very true. Thou art my friend, Baldazzar,
  And I have not forgotten it- thou'lt do me
  A piece of service; wilt thou go back and say
  Unto this man, that I, the Earl of Leicester,
  Hold him a villain?- thus much, I prythee, say
  Unto the Count- it is exceeding just
  He should have cause for quarrel.

                      BALDAZZAR
                          My lord!- my friend!-

                      POLITIAN (aside)
  'Tis he!- he comes himself? (aloud) Thou reasonest well.
  I know what thou wouldst say- not send the message-
  Well!- I will think of it- I will not send it.
  Now prythee, leave me- hither doth come a person
  With whom affairs of a most private nature
  I would adjust.

                      BALDAZZAR
             I go- to-morrow we meet,
  Do we not?- at the Vatican.

                      POLITIAN
                      At the Vatican.
                                                     (Exit BALDAZZAR)
                  Enter CASTIGLIONE

                      CASTIGLIONE
  The Earl of Leicester here!

                      POLITIAN
  I am the Earl of Leicester, and thou seest,
  Dost thou not? that I am here.

                      CASTIGLIONE
                        My lord, some strange,
  Some singular mistake- misunderstanding-
  Hath without doubt arisen: thou hast been urged
  Thereby, in heat of anger, to address
  Some words most unaccountable, in writing,
  To me, Castiglione; the bearer being
  Baldazzar, Duke of Surrey. I am aware
  Of nothing which might warrant thee in this thing,
  Having given thee no offence. Ha!- am I right?
  'Twas a mistake?- undoubtedly- we all
  Do err at times.

                      POLITIAN
           Draw, villain, and prate no more!

                      CASTIGLIONE
  Ha!- draw?- and villain? have at thee then at once,
  Proud Earl!                                                 (Draws)

                      POLITIAN (drawing)
       Thus to the expiatory tomb,
  Untimely sepulchre, I do devote thee
  In the name of Lalage!

                      CASTIGLIONE
             (letting fall his sword and recoiling to
                     the extremity of the stage)
                    Of Lalage!
  Hold off- thy sacred hand!- avaunt, I say!
  Avaunt- I will not fight thee- indeed I dare not.

                      POLITIAN
  Thou wilt not fight with me didst say, Sir Count?
  Shall I be baffled thus?- now this is well;
  Didst say thou darest not? Ha!

                      CASTIGLIONE
                         I dare not- dare not-
  Hold off thy hand- with that beloved name
  So fresh upon thy lips I will not fight thee-
  I cannot- dare not.

                      POLITIAN
                 Now by my halidom
  I do believe thee!- coward, I do believe thee!

                      CASTIGLIONE
  Ha!- coward!- this may not be!
     (Clutches his sword and staggers towards POLITIAN, but
        his purpose is changed before reaching him, and he
        falls upon his knee at the feet of the Earl)
                           Alas! my lord,
  It is- it is- most true. In such a cause
  I am the veriest coward. O pity me!

                      POLITIAN (greatly softened)
  Alas!- I do- indeed I pity thee.

                      CASTIGLIONE
                           And Lalage-

                      POLITIAN
  Scoundrel!- arise and die!

                      CASTIGLIONE
  It needeth not be- thus- thus- O let me die
  Thus on my bended knee. It were most fitting
  That in this deep humiliation I perish.
  For in the fight I will not raise a hand
  Against thee, Earl of Leicester. Strike thou home-
                                                   (Baring his bosom)
  Here is no let or hindrance to thy weapon-
  Strike home. I will not fight thee.

                      POLITIAN
                          Now, s' Death and Hell!
  Am I not- am I not sorely- grievously tempted
  To take thee at thy word? But mark me, sir,
  Think not to fly me thus. Do thou prepare
  For public insult in the streets- before
  The eyes of the citizens. I'll follow thee
  Like an avenging spirit I'll follow thee
  Even unto death. Before those whom thou lovest-
  Before all Rome I'll taunt thee, villain,- I'll taunt thee,
  Dost hear? with cowardice- thou will not fight me?
  Thou liest! thou shalt!                                      (Exit)

                      CASTIGLIONE
                Now this indeed is just!
  Most righteous, and most just, avenging Heaven!

                      -THE END-
.
                                      1850
                                    SERENADE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
SERENADE

    So sweet the hour, so calm the time,
    I feel it more than half a crime,
    When Nature sleeps and stars are mute,
    To mar the silence ev'n with lute.
    At rest on ocean's brilliant dyes
    An image of Elysium lies:
    Seven Pleiades entranced in Heaven,
    Form in the deep another seven:
    Endymion nodding from above
    Sees in the sea a second love.
    Within the valleys dim and brown,
    And on the spectral mountain's crown,
    The wearied light is dying down,
    And earth, and stars, and sea, and sky
    Are redolent of sleep, as I
    Am redolent of thee and thine
    Enthralling love, my Adeline.
    But list, O list,- so soft and low
    Thy lover's voice tonight shall flow,
    That, scarce awake, thy soul shall deem
    My words the music of a dream.
    Thus, while no single sound too rude
    Upon thy slumber shall intrude,
    Our thoughts, our souls- O God above!
    In every deed shall mingle, love.

                                    THE END
.
                                      1831
                                  THE SLEEPER
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      At midnight, in the month of June,
      I stand beneath the mystic moon.
      An opiate vapor, dewy, dim,
      Exhales from out her golden rim,
      And, softly dripping, drop by drop,
      Upon the quiet mountain top,
      Steals drowsily and musically
      Into the universal valley.
      The rosemary nods upon the grave;
      The lily lolls upon the wave;
      Wrapping the fog about its breast,
      The ruin molders into rest;
      Looking like Lethe, see! the lake
      A conscious slumber seems to take,
      And would not, for the world, awake.
      All Beauty sleeps!- and lo! where lies
      Irene, with her Destinies!

      O, lady bright! can it be right-
      This window open to the night?
      The wanton airs, from the tree-top,
      Laughingly through the lattice drop-
      The bodiless airs, a wizard rout,
      Flit through thy chamber in and out,
      And wave the curtain canopy
      So fitfully- so fearfully-
      Above the closed and fringed lid
      'Neath which thy slumb'ring soul lies hid,
      That, o'er the floor and down the wall,
      Like ghosts the shadows rise and fall!
      Oh, lady dear, hast thou no fear?
      Why and what art thou dreaming here?
      Sure thou art come O'er far-off seas,
      A wonder to these garden trees!
      Strange is thy pallor! strange thy dress,
      Strange, above all, thy length of tress,
      And this all solemn silentness!

      The lady sleeps! Oh, may her sleep,
      Which is enduring, so be deep!
      Heaven have her in its sacred keep!
      This chamber changed for one more holy,
      This bed for one more melancholy,
      I pray to God that she may lie
      For ever with unopened eye,
      While the pale sheeted ghosts go by!

      My love, she sleeps! Oh, may her sleep
      As it is lasting, so be deep!
      Soft may the worms about her creep!
      Far in the forest, dim and old,
      For her may some tall vault unfold-
      Some vault that oft has flung its black
      And winged panels fluttering back,
      Triumphant, o'er the crested palls,
      Of her grand family funerals-
      Some sepulchre, remote, alone,
      Against whose portal she hath thrown,
      In childhood, many an idle stone-
      Some tomb from out whose sounding door
      She ne'er shall force an echo more,
      Thrilling to think, poor child of sin!
      It was the dead who groaned within.

                    -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                                      SONG
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
SONG

    I saw thee on thy bridal day-
      When a burning blush came o'er thee,
    Though happiness around thee lay,
      The world all love before thee:

    And in thine eye a kindling light
      (Whatever it might be)
    Was all on Earth my aching sight
      Of Loveliness could see.

    That blush, perhaps, was maiden shame-
      As such it well may pass-
    Though its glow hath raised a fiercer flame
      In the breast of him, alas!

    Who saw thee on that bridal day,
      When that deep blush would come o'er thee,
    Though happiness around thee lay;
      The world all love before thee.

                  -THE END-
.
                                      1840
                                SONNET- SILENCE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      There are some qualities- some incorporate things,
        That have a double life, which thus is made
      A type of that twin entity which springs
        From matter and light, evinced in solid and shade.
      There is a two-fold Silence- sea and shore-
        Body and soul. One dwells in lonely places,
        Newly with grass o'ergrown; some solemn graces,
      Some human memories and tearful lore,
      Render him terrorless: his name's "No More."
      He is the corporate Silence: dread him not!
        No power hath he of evil in himself;
      But should some urgent fate (untimely lot!)
        Bring thee to meet his shadow (nameless elf,
      That haunteth the lone regions where hath trod
      No foot of man,) commend thyself to God!

                       -THE END-
.
                                      1829
                               SONNET- TO SCIENCE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

    Science! true daughter of Old Time thou art!
      Who alterest all things with thy peering eyes.
    Why preyest thou thus upon the poet's heart,
      Vulture, whose wings are dull realities?
    How should he love thee? or how deem thee wise,
      Who wouldst not leave him in his wandering
    To seek for treasure in the jewelled skies,
      Albeit he soared with an undaunted wing?
    Hast thou not dragged Diana from her car?
      And driven the Hamadryad from the wood
    To seek a shelter in some happier star?
      Hast thou not torn the Naiad from her flood,
    The Elfin from the green grass, and from me
    The summer dream beneath the tamarind tree?

                     -THE END-
.
                                      1837
                                SONNET- TO ZANTE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      Fair isle, that from the fairest of all flowers,
        Thy gentlest of all gentle names dost take!
      How many memories of what radiant hours
        At sight of thee and thine at once awake!
      How many scenes of what departed bliss!
        How many thoughts of what entombed hopes!
      How many visions of a maiden that is
        No more- no more upon thy verdant slopes!
      No more! alas, that magical sad sound
        Transforming all! Thy charms shall please no more-
      Thy memory no more! Accursed ground
        Henceforth I hold thy flower-enameled shore,
      O hyacinthine isle! O purple Zante!
        "Isola d'oro! Fior di Levante!"

                      -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                              SPIRITS OF THE DEAD
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      Thy soul shall find itself alone
      'Mid dark thoughts of the grey tomb-stone;
      Not one, of all the crowd, to pry
      Into thine hour of secrecy.

      Be silent in that solitude,
        Which is not loneliness- for then
      The spirits of the dead, who stood
        In life before thee, are again
      In death around thee, and their will
      Shall overshadow thee; be still.

      The night, though clear, shall frown,
      And the stars shall not look down
      From their high thrones in the Heaven
      With light like hope to mortals given,
      But their red orbs, without beam,
      To thy weariness shall seem
      As a burning and a fever
      Which would cling to thee for ever.

      Now are thoughts thou shalt not banish,
      Now are visions ne'er to vanish;
      From thy spirit shall they pass
      No more, like dew-drop from the grass.

      The breeze, the breath of God, is still,
      And the mist upon the hill
      Shadowy, shadowy, yet unbroken,
      Is a symbol and a token.
      How it hangs upon the trees,
      A mystery of mysteries!

                 -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                                    STANZAS
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
STANZAS
                    Stanzas

    How often we forget all time, when lone
    Admiring Nature's universal throne;
    Her woods- her wilds- her mountains- the intense
    Reply of HERS to OUR intelligence! [BYRON, The Island.]

                         I

    In youth have I known one with whom the Earth
    In secret communing held- as he with it,
    In daylight, and in beauty from his birth:
    Whose fervid, flickering torch of life was lit
    From the sun and stars, whence he had drawn forth
    A passionate light- such for his spirit was fit-
    And yet that spirit knew not, in the hour
    Of its own fervor what had o'er it power.

                        II

    Perhaps it may be that my mind is wrought
    To a fever by the moonbeam that hangs o'er,
    But I will half believe that wild light fraught
    With more of sovereignty than ancient lore
    Hath ever told- or is it of a thought
    The unembodied essence, and no more,
    That with a quickening spell doth o'er us pass
    As dew of the night-time o'er the summer grass?

                       III

    Doth o'er us pass, when, as th' expanding eye
    To the loved object- so the tear to the lid
    Will start, which lately slept in apathy?
    And yet it need not be- (that object) hid
    From us in life- but common- which doth lie
    Each hour before us- but then only, bid
    With a strange sound, as of a harp-string broken,
    To awake us- 'Tis a symbol and a token

                       IV

    Of what in other worlds shall be- and given
    In beauty by our God, to those alone
    Who otherwise would fall from life and Heaven
    Drawn by their heart's passion, and that tone,
    That high tone of the spirit which hath striven,
    Tho' not with Faith- with godliness- whose throne
    With desperate energy 't hath beaten down;
    Wearing its own deep feeling as a crown.

                         -THE END-
.
                                      1850

                               TALE OF JERUSALEM

                               by Edgar Allan Poe

          Intensos rigidam in frontem ascendere canos

        Passus erat

                                                Lucan

        --a bristly bore.

                                          Translation

  "LET us hurry to the walls," said Abel-Phittim to Buzi-Ben-Levi and
Simeon the Pharisee, on the tenth day of the month Thammuz, in the
year of the world three thousand nine hundred and forty-one- "let us
hasten to the ramparts adjoining the gate of Benjamin, which is in the
city of David, and overlooking the camp of the uncircumcised; for it
is the last hour of the fourth watch, being sunrise; and the
idolaters, in fulfilment of the promise of Pompey, should be
awaiting us with the lambs for the sacrifices."

  Simeon, Abel-Phittim, and Buzi-Ben-Levi, were the Gizbarim, or
sub-collectors of the offering, in the holy city of Jerusalem.

  "Verily," replied the Pharisee, "let us hasten: for this
generosity in the heathen is unwonted; and fickle-mindedness has
ever been an attribute of the worshippers of Baal."

  "That they are fickle-minded and treacherous is as true as the
Pentateuch," said Buzi-Ben-Levi, "but that is only towards the
people of Adonai. When was it ever known that the Ammonites proved
wanting to their own interests? Methinks it is no great stretch of
generosity to allow us lambs for the altar of the Lord, receiving in
lieu thereof thirty silver shekels per head!"

  "Thou forgettest, however, Ben-Levi," replied Abel-Phittim, "that
the Roman Pompey, who is now impiously besieging the city of the Most
High, has no assurity that we apply not the lambs thus purchased for
the altar, to the sustenance of the body, rather than of the spirit."

  "Now, by the five corners of my beard!" shouted the Pharisee, who
belonged to the sect called The Dashers (that little knot of saints
whose manner of dashing and lacerating the feet against the pavement
was long a thorn and a reproach to less zealous devotees- a
stumbling-block to less gifted perambulators)- "by the five corners
of that beard which, as a priest, I am forbidden to shave!- have we
lived to see the day when a blaspheming and idolatrous upstart of Rome
shall accuse us of appropriating to the appetites of the flesh the
most holy and consecrated elements? Have we lived to see the day
when-"

  "Let us not question the motives of the Philistine," interrupted
Abel-Phittim, "for to-day we profit for the first time by his
avarice or by his generosity, but rather let us hurry to the ramparts,
lest offerings should be wanting for that altar whose fire the rains
of heaven cannot extinguish, and whose pillars of smoke no tempest can
turn aside."

  That part of the city to which our worthy Gizbarin now hastened, and
which bore the name of its architect, King David, was esteemed the
most strongly fortified district of Jerusalem; being situated upon the
steep and lofty hill of Zion. Here, a broad, deep, circumvallatory
trench, hewn from the solid rock, was defended by a wall of great
strength erected upon its inner edge. This wall was adorned, at
regular interspaces, by square towers of white marble; the lowest
sixty, and the highest one hundred and twenty cubits in height. But,
in the vicinity of the gate of Benjamin, the wall arose by no means
from the margin of the fosse. On the contrary, between the level of
the ditch and the basement of the rampart, sprang up a perpendicular
cliff of two hundred and fifty cubits, forming part of the precipitous
Mount Moriah. So that when Simeon and his associates arrived on the
summit of the tower called Adoni-Bezek- the loftiest of all the
turrets around about Jerusalem, and the usual place of conference with
the besieging army- they looked down upon the camp of the enemy from
an eminence excelling by many feet that of the Pyramid of Cheops, and,
by several, that of the temple of Belus.

  "Verily," sighed the Pharisee, as he peered dizzly over the
precipice, "the uncircumcised are as the sands by the seashore- as
the locusts in the wilderness! The valley of The King hath become
the valley of Adommin."

  "And yet," added Ben-Levi, "thou canst not point me out a
Philistine- no, not one- from Aleph to Tau- from the wilderness to
the battlements- who seemeth any bigger than the letter Jod!"

  "Lower away the basket with the shekels of silver!" here shouted a
Roman soldier in a hoarse, rough voice, which appeared to issue from
the regions of Pluto- "lower away the basket with the accursed coin
which it has broken the jaw of a noble Roman to pronounce! Is it
thus you evince your gratitude to our master Pompeius, who, in his
condescension, has thought fit to listen to your idolatrous
importunities? The god Phoebus, who is a true god, has been
charioted for an hour- and were you not to be on the ramparts by
sunrise? Aedepol! do you think that we, the conquerors of the world,
have nothing better to do than stand waiting by the walls of every
kennel, to traffic with the dogs of the earth? Lower away! I say- and
see that your trumpery be bright in color and just in weight!"

  "El Elohim!" ejaculated the Pharisee, as the discordant tones of the
centurion rattled up the crags of the precipice, and fainted away
against the temple- "El Elohim!- who is the God Phoebus?- whom doth
the blasphemer invoke? Thou, Buzi-Ben-Levi! who art read in the laws
of the Gentiles, and hast sojourned among them who dabble with the
Teraphim!- is it Nergal of whom the idolater speaketh?- or
Ashimah?- or- Nibhaz?- or Tartak?- or Adramalech?- or Anamalech?- or
Succoth-Benith?- or Dragon?- or Belial?- or Baal-Perith?- or
Baal-Peor?- or Baal-Zebub?"

  "Verily it is neither- but beware how thou lettest the rope slip
too rapidly through thy fingers; for should the wicker-work chance
to hang on the projection of yonder crag, there will be a woful
outpouring of the holy things of the sanctuary."

  By the assistance of some rudely constructed machinery, the
heavily laden basket was now carefully lowered down among the
multitude; and, from the giddy pinnacle, the Romans were seen
gathering confusedly round it; but owing to the vast height and the
prevalence of a fog, no distinct view of their operations could be
obtained.

  Half an hour had already elapsed.

  "We shall be too late!" sighed the Pharisee, as at the expiration of
this period, he looked over into the abyss- "we shall be too late! we
shall be turned out of office by the Katholim."

  "No more," responded Abel-Phittim,- "no more shall we feast upon
the fat of the land- no longer shall our beards be odorous with
frankincense- our loins girded up with fine linen from the Temple."

  "Raca!" swore Ben-Levi, "Raca! do they mean to defraud us of the
purchase money? or, Holy Moses! are they weighing the shekels of the
tabernacle?

  "They have given the signal at last!" cried the Pharisee- "they
have given the signal at last!- pull away, Abel-Phittim!- and thou,
Buzi-Ben-Levi, pull away!- for verily the Philistines have either
still hold upon the basket, or the Lord hath softened their hearts to
place therein a beast of good weight!" And the Gizbarim pulled away,
while their burthen swung heavily upwards through the still increasing
mist.

  "Booshoh he!"- as, at the conclusion of an hour, some object at the
extremity of the rope became indistinctly visible- "Booshoh he!" was
the exclamation which burst from the lips of Ben-Levi.

  "Booshoh he!- for shame!- it is a ram from the thickets of Engedi,
and as rugged as the valley of Jehosaphat!"

  "It is a firstling of the flock," said Abel-Phittim, "I know him
by the bleating of his lips, and the innocent folding of his limbs.
His eyes are more beautiful than the jewels of the Pectoral, and his
flesh is like the honey of Hebron."

  "It is a fatted calf from the pastures of Bashan," said the
Pharisee, "the heathen have dealt wonderfully with us!- let us raise
up our voices in a psalm!- let us give thanks on the shawm and on the
psaltery- on the harp and on the huggab- on the cythern and on the
sackbutt"

  It was not until the basket had arrived within a few feet of the
Gizbarium, that a low grunt betrayed to their perception a hog of no
common size.

  "Now El Emanu!" slowly, and with upturned eyes ejaculated the
trio, as, letting go their hold, the emancipated porker tumbled
headlong among the Philistines, "El Emanu!- God be with us- it is the
unutterable flesh!"

                                   -THE END-
.
                                      1827
                                   TAMERLANE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
TAMERLANE

      Kind solace in a dying hour!
        Such, father, is not (now) my theme-
      I will not madly deem that power
          Of Earth may shrive me of the sin
          Unearthly pride hath revell'd in-
        I have no time to dote or dream:
      You call it hope- that fire of fire!
      It is but agony of desire:
      If I can hope- Oh God! I can-
        Its fount is holier- more divine-
      I would not call thee fool, old man,
        But such is not a gift of thine.

      Know thou the secret of a spirit
        Bow'd from its wild pride into shame.
      O yearning heart! I did inherit
        Thy withering portion with the fame,
      The searing glory which hath shone
      Amid the jewels of my throne,
      Halo of Hell! and with a pain
      Not Hell shall make me fear again-
      O craving heart, for the lost flowers
      And sunshine of my summer hours!
      The undying voice of that dead time,
      With its interminable chime,
      Rings, in the spirit of a spell,
      Upon thy emptiness- a knell.

      I have not always been as now:
      The fever'd diadem on my brow
        I claim'd and won usurpingly-
      Hath not the same fierce heirdom given
        Rome to the Caesar- this to me?
          The heritage of a kingly mind,
      And a proud spirit which hath striven
          Triumphantly with human kind.

      On mountain soil I first drew life:
        The mists of the Taglay have shed
        Nightly their dews upon my head,
      And, I believe, the winged strife
      And tumult of the headlong air
      Have nestled in my very hair.

      So late from Heaven- that dew- it fell
        (Mid dreams of an unholy night)
      Upon me with the touch of Hell,
        While the red flashing of the light
      From clouds that hung, like banners, o'er,
        Appeared to my half-closing eye
        The pageantry of monarchy,
      And the deep trumpet-thunder's roar
        Came hurriedly upon me, telling
          Of human battle, where my voice,
      My own voice, silly child!- was swelling
          (O! how my spirit would rejoice,
      And leap within me at the cry)
      The battle-cry of Victory!

      The rain came down upon my head
        Unshelter'd- and the heavy wind
        Rendered me mad and deaf and blind.
      It was but man, I thought, who shed
        Laurels upon me: and the rush-
      The torrent of the chilly air
        Gurgled within my ear the crush
      Of empires- with the captive's prayer-
      The hum of suitors- and the tone
      Of flattery 'round a sovereign's throne.

      My passions, from that hapless hour,
        Usurp'd a tyranny which men
      Have deem'd, since I have reach'd to power,
          My innate nature- be it so:
        But father, there liv'd one who, then,
      Then- in my boyhood- when their fire
          Burn'd with a still intenser glow,
      (For passion must, with youth, expire)
        E'en then who knew this iron heart
        In woman's weakness had a part.

      I have no words- alas!- to tell
      The loveliness of loving well!
      Nor would I now attempt to trace
      The more than beauty of a face
      Whose lineaments, upon my mind,
      Are- shadows on th' unstable wind:
      Thus I remember having dwelt
        Some page of early lore upon,
      With loitering eye, till I have felt
      The letters- with their meaning- melt
        To fantasies- with none.

      O, she was worthy of all love!
        Love- as in infancy was mine-
      'Twas such as angel minds above
        Might envy; her young heart the shrine
      On which my every hope and thought
        Were incense- then a goodly gift,
          For they were childish and upright-
      Pure- as her young example taught:
        Why did I leave it, and, adrift,
          Trust to the fire within, for light?

      We grew in age- and love- together,
        Roaming the forest, and the wild;
      My breast her shield in wintry weather-
        And when the friendly sunshine smil'd,
      And she would mark the opening skies,
      I saw no Heaven- but in her eyes.

      Young Love's first lesson is- the heart:
        For 'mid that sunshine, and those smiles,
      When, from our little cares apart,
        And laughing at her girlish wiles,
      I'd throw me on her throbbing breast,
        And pour my spirit out in tears-
      There was no need to speak the rest-
        No need to quiet any fears
      Of her- who ask'd no reason why,
      But turn'd on me her quiet eye!

      Yet more than worthy of the love
      My spirit struggled with, and strove,
      When, on the mountain peak, alone,
      Ambition lent it a new tone-
      I had no being- but in thee:
        The world, and all it did contain
      In the earth- the air- the sea-
        Its joy- its little lot of pain
      That was new pleasure- the ideal,
        Dim vanities of dreams by night-

      And dimmer nothings which were real-
        (Shadows- and a more shadowy light!)
      Parted upon their misty wings,
        And, so, confusedly, became
        Thine image, and- a name- a name!
      Two separate- yet most intimate things.

      I was ambitious- have you known
        The passion, father? You have not:
      A cottager, I mark'd a throne
      Of half the world as all my own,
        And murmur'd at such lowly lot-
      But, just like any other dream,
        Upon the vapour of the dew
      My own had past, did not the beam
        Of beauty which did while it thro'
      The minute- the hour- the day- oppress
      My mind with double loveliness.

      We walk'd together on the crown
      Of a high mountain which look'd down
      Afar from its proud natural towers
        Of rock and forest, on the hills-
      The dwindled hills! begirt with bowers,
        And shouting with a thousand rills.

      I spoke to her of power and pride,
        But mystically- in such guise
      That she might deem it nought beside
        The moment's converse; in her eyes
      I read, perhaps too carelessly-
        A mingled feeling with my own-
      The flush on her bright cheek, to me
        Seem'd to become a queenly throne
      Too well that I should let it be
        Light in the wilderness alone.

      I wrapp'd myself in grandeur then,
        And donn'd a visionary crown-
          Yet it was not that Fantasy
          Had thrown her mantle over me-
      But that, among the rabble- men,
        Lion ambition is chained down-
      And crouches to a keeper's hand-
      Not so in deserts where the grand-
      The wild- the terrible conspire
      With their own breath to fan his fire.

      Look 'round thee now on Samarcand!
        Is not she queen of Earth? her pride
      Above all cities? in her hand
        Their destinies? in all beside
      Of glory which the world hath known
      Stands she not nobly and alone?
      Falling- her veriest stepping-stone
      Shall form the pedestal of a throne-
      And who her sovereign? Timour- he
        Whom the astonished people saw
      Striding o'er empires haughtily
        A diadem'd outlaw!

      O, human love! thou spirit given
      On Earth, of all we hope in Heaven!
      Which fall'st into the soul like rain
      Upon the Siroc-wither'd plain,
      And, failing in thy power to bless,
      But leav'st the heart a wilderness!
      Idea! which bindest life around
      With music of so strange a sound,
      And beauty of so wild a birth-
      Farewell! for I have won the Earth.

      When Hope, the eagle that tower'd, could see
        No cliff beyond him in the sky,
      His pinions were bent droopingly-
        And homeward turn'd his soften'd eye.
      'Twas sunset: when the sun will part
      There comes a sullenness of heart
      To him who still would look upon
      The glory of the summer sun.
      That soul will hate the ev'ning mist,
      So often lovely, and will list
      To the sound of the coming darkness (known
      To those whose spirits hearken) as one
      Who, in a dream of night, would fly
      But cannot from a danger nigh.

      What tho' the moon- the white moon
      Shed all the splendour of her noon,
      Her smile is chilly, and her beam,
      In that time of dreariness, will seem
      (So like you gather in your breath)
      A portrait taken after death.
      And boyhood is a summer sun
      Whose waning is the dreariest one-
      For all we live to know is known,
      And all we seek to keep hath flown-
      Let life, then, as the day-flower, fall
      With the noon-day beauty- which is all.

      I reach'd my home- my home no more
        For all had flown who made it so.
      I pass'd from out its mossy door,
        And, tho' my tread was soft and low,
      A voice came from the threshold stone
      Of one whom I had earlier known-
        O, I defy thee, Hell, to show
        On beds of fire that burn below,
        A humbler heart- a deeper woe.

      Father, I firmly do believe-
        I know- for Death, who comes for me
          From regions of the blest afar,
      Where there is nothing to deceive,
          Hath left his iron gate ajar,
        And rays of truth you cannot see
        Are flashing thro' Eternity-
      I do believe that Eblis hath
      A snare in every human path-
      Else how, when in the holy grove
      I wandered of the idol, Love,
      Who daily scents his snowy wings
      With incense of burnt offerings
      From the most unpolluted things,
      Whose pleasant bowers are yet so riven
      Above with trellis'd rays from Heaven,
      No mote may shun- no tiniest fly-
      The lightning of his eagle eye-
      How was it that Ambition crept,
        Unseen, amid the revels there,
      Till growing bold, he laughed and leapt
        In the tangles of Love's very hair?

                      -THE END-
.
                                      1830
                                     TO --
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      The bowers whereat, in dreams, I see
        The wantonest singing birds,
      Are lips- and all thy melody
        Of lip-begotten words-

      Thine eyes, in Heaven of heart enshrined,
        Then desolately fall,
      O God! on my funereal mind
        Like starlight on a pall-

     Thy heart- thy heart!- I wake and sigh,
        And sleep to dream till day
      Of the truth that gold can never buy-
        Of the baubles that it may.

                   -THE END-
.
                                      1829
                                    TO -- --
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      Not long ago, the writer of these lines,
      In the mad pride of intellectuality,
      Maintained "the power of words"- denied that ever
      A thought arose within the human brain
      Beyond the utterance of the human tongue:
      And now, as if in mockery of that boast,
      Two words- two foreign soft dissyllables-
      Italian tones, made only to be murmured
      By angels dreaming in the moonlit "dew
      That hangs like chains of pearl on Hermon hill,"
      Have stirred from out the abysses of his heart,
      Unthought-like thoughts that are the souls of thought,
      Richer, far wilder, far diviner visions
      Than even seraph harper, Israfel,
      (Who has "the sweetest voice of all God's creatures,")
      Could hope to utter. And I! my spells are broken.
      The pen falls powerless from my shivering hand.
      With thy dear name as text, though bidden by thee,
      I cannot write- I cannot speak or think-
      Alas, I cannot feel; for 'tis not feeling,
      This standing motionless upon the golden
      Threshold of the wide-open gate of dreams.
      Gazing, entranced, adown the gorgeous vista,
      And thrilling as I see, upon the right,
      Upon the left, and all the way along,
      Amid empurpled vapors, far away
      To where the prospect terminates- thee only.

                        -THE END-
.
                                      1835
                                     TO F--
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

       Beloved! amid the earnest woes
         That crowd around my earthly path-
       (Drear path, alas! where grows
       Not even one lonely rose)-
         My soul at least a solace hath
       In dreams of thee, and therein knows
       An Eden of bland repose.

       And thus thy memory is to me
         Like some enchanted far-off isle
       In some tumultuous sea-
       Some ocean throbbing far and free
         With storms- but where meanwhile
       Serenest skies continually
       Just o'er that one bright island smile.

                    -THE END-
.
                                      1835
                                TO F--S S. O--D
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

            Thou wouldst be loved?- then let thy heart
              From its present pathway part not!
            Being everything which now thou art,
              Be nothing which thou art not.
            So with the world thy gentle ways,
              Thy grace, thy more than beauty,
            Shall be an endless theme of praise,
              And love- a simple duty.

                       -THE END-
.
                                      1831
                                    TO HELEN
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

       Helen, thy beauty is to me
         Like those Nicean barks of yore,
       That gently, o'er a perfumed sea,
         The weary, wayworn wanderer bore
         To his own native shore.

       On desperate seas long wont to roam,
         Thy hyacinth hair, thy classic face,
       Thy Naiad airs have brought me home
         To the glory that was Greece
       And the grandeur that was Rome.

       Lo! in yon brilliant window-niche
         How statue-like I see thee stand,
         The agate lamp within thy hand!
       Ah, Psyche, from the regions which
         Are Holy Land!
                          -THE END-
.
                                      1848
                                    TO HELEN
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

    I saw thee once- once only- years ago:
    I must not say how many- but not many.
    It was a July midnight; and from out
    A full-orbed moon, that, like thine own soul, soaring,
    Sought a precipitate pathway up through heaven,
    There fell a silvery-silken veil of light,
    With quietude, and sultriness, and slumber,
    Upon the upturned faces of a thousand
    Roses that grew in an enchanted garden,
    Where no wind dared to stir, unless on tiptoe-
    Fell on the upturn'd faces of these roses
    That gave out, in return for the love-light,
    Their odorous souls in an ecstatic death-
    Fell on the upturn'd faces of these roses
    That smiled and died in this parterre, enchanted
    By thee, and by the poetry of thy presence.

    Clad all in white, upon a violet bank
    I saw thee half reclining; while the moon
    Fell on the upturn'd faces of the roses,
    And on thine own, upturn'd- alas, in sorrow!

    Was it not Fate, that, on this July midnight-
    Was it not Fate, (whose name is also Sorrow,)
    That bade me pause before that garden-gate,
    To breathe the incense of those slumbering roses?
    No footstep stirred: the hated world an slept,
    Save only thee and me. (Oh, Heaven!- oh, God!
    How my heart beats in coupling those two words!)
    Save only thee and me. I paused- I looked-
    And in an instant all things disappeared.
    (Ah, bear in mind this garden was enchanted!)

    The pearly lustre of the moon went out:
    The mossy banks and the meandering paths,
    The happy flowers and the repining trees,
    Were seen no more: the very roses' odors
    Died in the arms of the adoring airs.
    All- all expired save thee- save less than thou:
    Save only the divine light in thine eyes-
    Save but the soul in thine uplifted eyes.
    I saw but them- they were the world to me!
    I saw but them- saw only them for hours,
    Saw only them until the moon went down.
    What wild heart-histories seemed to he enwritten
    Upon those crystalline, celestial spheres!
    How dark a woe, yet how sublime a hope!
    How silently serene a sea of pride!
    How daring an ambition; yet how deep-
    How fathomless a capacity for love!

    But now, at length, dear Dian sank from sight,
    Into a western couch of thunder-cloud;
    And thou, a ghost, amid the entombing trees
    Didst glide away. Only thine eyes remained;
    They would not go- they never yet have gone;
    Lighting my lonely pathway home that night,
    They have not left me (as my hopes have) since;
    They follow me- they lead me through the years.
    They are my ministers- yet I their slave.
    Their office is to illumine and enkindle-
    My duty, to be saved by their bright light,
    And purified in their electric fire,
    And sanctified in their elysian fire.
    They fill my soul with Beauty (which is Hope),
    And are far up in Heaven- the stars I kneel to
    In the sad, silent watches of my night;
    While even in the meridian glare of day
    I see them still- two sweetly scintillant
    Venuses, unextinguished by the sun!

                   -THE END-
.
                                      1830
                                     TO M--
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      O! I care not that my earthly lot
        Hath little of Earth in it,
      That years of love have been forgot
        In the fever of a minute:

      I heed not that the desolate
        Are happier, sweet, than I,
      But that you meddle with my fate
        Who am a passer by.

      It is not that my founts of bliss
        Are gushing- strange! with tears-
      Or that the thrill of a single kiss
        Hath palsied many years-

      'Tis not that the flowers of twenty springs
        Which have wither'd as they rose
      Lie dead on my heart-strings
        With the weight of an age of snows.

      Not that the grass- O! may it thrive!
        On my grave is growing or grown-
      But that, while I am dead yet alive
        I cannot be, lady, alone.

                   -THE END-
.
                                      1847
                                   TO M.L.S.
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

     Of all who hail thy presence as the morning-
     Of all to whom thine absence is the night-
     The blotting utterly from out high heaven
     The sacred sun- of all who, weeping, bless thee
     Hourly for hope- for life- ah! above all,
     For the resurrection of deep-buried faith
     In Truth- in Virtue- in Humanity-
     Of all who, on Despair's unhallowed bed
     Lying down to die, have suddenly arisen
     At thy soft-murmured words, "Let there be light!"
     At the soft-murmured words that were fulfilled
     In the seraphic glancing of thine eyes-
     Of all who owe thee most- whose gratitude
     Nearest resembles worship- oh, remember
     The truest- the most fervently devoted,
     And think that these weak lines are written by him-
     By him who, as he pens them, thrills to think
     His spirit is communing with an angel's.

                   -THE END-
.
                                      1849
                                  TO MY MOTHER
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

    Because I feel that, in the Heavens above,
      The angels, whispering to one another,
    Can find, among their burning terms of love,
      None so devotional as that of "Mother,"
    Therefore by that dear name I long have called you-
      You who are more than mother unto me,
    And fill my heart of hearts, where Death installed you
      In setting my Virginia's spirit free.
    My mother- my own mother, who died early,
      Was but the mother of myself; but you
    Are mother to the one I loved so dearly,
      And thus are dearer than the mother I knew
    By that infinity with which my wife
      Was dearer to my soul than its soul-life.

                     -THE END-
.
                                      1834
                               TO ONE IN PARADISE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

       Thou wast all that to me, love,
         For which my soul did pine-
       A green isle in the sea, love,
         A fountain and a shrine,
       All wreathed with fairy fruits and flowers,
         And all the flowers were mine.

       Ah, dream too bright to last!
         Ah, starry Hope! that didst arise
       But to be overcast!
         A voice from out the Future cries,
       "On! on!"- but o'er the Past
         (Dim gulf!) my spirit hovering lies
       Mute, motionless, aghast!

       For, alas! alas! me
         The light of Life is o'er!
         "No more- no more- no more-"
       (Such language holds the solemn sea
         To the sands upon the shore)
       Shall bloom the thunder-blasted tree
         Or the stricken eagle soar!

       And all my days are trances,
         And all my nightly dreams
       Are where thy grey eye glances,
         And where thy footstep gleams-
       In what ethereal dances,
         By what eternal streams.

                 -THE END-
.
                                      1829
                                TO THE RIVER --
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

      Fair river! in thy bright, clear flow
        Of crystal, wandering water,
      Thou art an emblem of the glow
          Of beauty- the unhidden heart-
          The playful maziness of art
      In old Alberto's daughter;

      But when within thy wave she looks-
        Which glistens then, and trembles-
      Why, then, the prettiest of brooks
        Her worshipper resembles;
      For in his heart, as in thy stream,
        Her image deeply lies-
      His heart which trembles at the beam
        Of her soul-searching eyes.

                    -THE END-
.
                                      1847
                                    ULALAME
                               by Edgar Allan Poe
ULALUME

      The skies they were ashen and sober;
          The leaves they were crisped and sere-
          The leaves they were withering and sere;
      It was night in the lonesome October
          Of my most immemorial year;
      It was hard by the dim lake of Auber,
          In the misty mid region of Weir-
      It was down by the dank tarn of Auber,
          In the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.

      Here once, through an alley Titanic,
          Of cypress, I roamed with my Soul-
          Of cypress, with Psyche, my Soul.
      There were days when my heart was volcanic
          As the scoriac rivers that roll-
          As the lavas that restlessly roll
      Their sulphurous currents down Yaanek
          In the ultimate climes of the pole-
      That groan as they roll down Mount Yaanek
          In the realms of the boreal pole.

      Our talk had been serious and sober,
          But our thoughts they were palsied and sere-
          Our memories were treacherous and sere-
      For we knew not the month was October,
          And we marked not the night of the year-
          (Ah, night of all nights in the year!)
      We noted not the dim lake of Auber-
          (Though once we had journeyed down here),
      Remembered not the dank tarn of Auber,
          Nor the ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir.

      And now, as the night was senescent,
          And star-dials pointed to morn-
          As the star-dials hinted of morn-
      At the end of our path a liquescent
          And nebulous lustre was born,
      Out of which a miraculous crescent
          Arose with a duplicate horn-
      Astarte's bediamonded crescent
          Distinct with its duplicate horn.

      And I said- "She is warmer than Dian:
          She rolls through an ether of sighs-
          She revels in a region of sighs:
      She has seen that the tears are not dry on
          These cheeks, where the worm never dies,
      And has come past the stars of the Lion,
          To point us the path to the skies-
          To the Lethean peace of the skies-
      Come up, in despite of the Lion,
          To shine on us with her bright eyes-
      Come up through the lair of the Lion,
          With love in her luminous eyes."

      But Psyche, uplifting her finger,
          Said- "Sadly this star I mistrust-
          Her pallor I strangely mistrust:-
      Oh, hasten!- oh, let us not linger!
          Oh, fly!- let us fly!- for we must."
      In terror she spoke, letting sink her
          Wings until they trailed in the dust-
      In agony sobbed, letting sink her
          Plumes till they trailed in the dust-
          Till they sorrowfully trailed in the dust.

      I replied- "This is nothing but dreaming:
          Let us on by this tremulous light!
          Let us bathe in this crystalline light!
      Its Sybilic splendor is beaming
          With Hope and in Beauty to-night:-
          See!- it flickers up the sky through the night!
      Ah, we safely may trust to its gleaming,
          And be sure it will lead us aright-
      We safely may trust to a gleaming
          That cannot but guide us aright,
          Since it flickers up to Heaven through the night."

      Thus I pacified Psyche and kissed her,
          And tempted her out of her gloom-
          And conquered her scruples and gloom;
      And we passed to the end of the vista,
          But were stopped by the door of a tomb-
          By the door of a legended tomb;
      And I said- "What is written, sweet sister,
          On the door of this legended tomb?"
          She replied- "Ulalume- Ulalume-
          'Tis the vault of thy lost Ulalume!"

      Then my heart it grew ashen and sober
          As the leaves that were crisped and sere-
          As the leaves that were withering and sere-
      And I cried- "It was surely October
          On this very night of last year
          That I journeyed- I journeyed down here-
          That I brought a dread burden down here-
          On this night of all nights in the year,
          Ah, what demon has tempted me here?
      Well I know, now, this dim lake of Auber-
          This misty mid region of Weir-
      Well I know, now, this dank tarn of Auber,
          This ghoul-haunted woodland of Weir."

                       -THE END-
.
                                      1846
                                  A VALENTINE
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

  For her this rhyme is penned, whose luminous eyes,
    Brightly expressive as the twins of Leda,
  Shall find her own sweet name, that nestling lies
    Upon the page, enwrapped from every reader.
  Search narrowly the lines!- they hold a treasure
    Divine- a talisman- an amulet
  That must be worn at heart. Search well the measure-
    The words- the syllables! Do not forget
  The trivialest point, or you may lose your labor
    And yet there is in this no Gordian knot
  Which one might not undo without a sabre,
    If one could merely comprehend the plot.
  Enwritten upon the leaf where now are peering
    Eyes scintillating soul, there lie perdus
  Three eloquent words oft uttered in the hearing
    Of poets, by poets- as the name is a poet's, too,
  Its letters, although naturally lying
    Like the knight Pinto- Mendez Ferdinando-
  Still form a synonym for Truth- Cease trying!
    You will not read the riddle, though you do the best you can do.

                        -THE END-
.
                                      1831
                              THE VALLEY OF UNREST
                               by Edgar Allan Poe

       Once it smiled a silent dell
       Where the people did not dwell;
       They had gone unto the wars,
       Trusting to the mild-eyed stars,
       Nightly, from their azure towers,
       To keep watch above the flowers,
       In the midst of which all day
       The red sunlight lazily lay.
       Now each visitor shall confess
       The sad valley's restlessness.
       Nothing there is motionless-
       Nothing save the airs that brood
       Over the magic solitude.
       Ah, by no wind are stirred those trees
       That palpitate like the chill seas
       Around the misty Hebrides!
       Ah, by no wind those clouds are driven
       That rustle through the unquiet Heaven
       Uneasily, from morn till even,
       Over the violets there that lie
       In myriad types of the human eye-
       Over the lilies there that wave
       And weep above a nameless grave!
       They wave:- from out their fragrant tops
       Eternal dews come down in drops.
       They weep:- from off their delicate stems
       Perennial tears descend in gems.

                     -THE END-
.



                            The Raven

                        by Edgar Allen Poe


       (Published in the Broadway Journal, New York, 1845)



Once upon a midnight dreary, while I pondered, weak and weary,
Over many quaint and curious volume of forgotten lore---
While I nodded, nearly napping, suddenly there came a tapping,
As of some one gently rapping, rapping at my chamber door.
"'T is some visitor," I muttered, "tapping at my chamber door---
                              Only this and nothing more."

Ah, distinctly I remember it was in the bleak December;
And each separate dying ember wrought its ghost upon the floor.
Eagerly I wished the morrow; --- vainly I had sought to borrow
From my books  surcease of sorrow --- sorrow for the lost Lenore---
For the rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore---
                              Nameless here for evermore.

And the silken, sad, uncertain rustling of each purple curtain
Thrilled me --- filled me with fantastic terrors never felt before;
So that now to still the beating of my heart, I stood repeating,
"'T is some visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door---
Some late visitor entreating entrance at my chamber door;---
                              This is it and nothing more."

Presently my soul grew stronger; hesitating then no longer,
"Sir," said I, "or Madam, truly your forgiveness I implore;
But the fact is I was napping, and so gently you came rapping,
And so faintly you came tapping, tapping at my chamber door,
That I scarce was sure I heard you" --- here I opened wide the door;---
                              Darkness there and nothing more.

Deep into that darkness peering, long I stood there wondering, fearing,
Doubting, dreaming dreams no mortal ever dared to dream before;
But the silence was unbroken, and the stillness gave no token,
And the only word there spoken was the whispered word "Lenore."
This I whispered, and an echo murmured back the word "Lenore?"
                              Merely this and nothing more.

Back into the chamber turning, all my soul within me burning,
Soon again I heard a tapping somewhat louder than before.
"Surely," said I, "surely that is something at my window lattice;
Let me see, then, what thereat is, and this mystery explore---
Let my heart be still a moment, and this mystery explore;---
                              'T is the wind and nothing more!"

Open here I flung the shutter, when, with many a flirt and flutter,
In there stepped a stately Raven of the saintly days of yore.
Not the least obeisance made he; not a minute stopped or stayed he;
But, with mien of lord or lady, perched above my chamber door---
Perched upon a bust of Pallas just above my chamber door---
                              Perched and sat, and nothing more.

Then this ebony bird beguiling my sad fancy into smiling,
By the grave and stern decorum of the countenance it wore,
"Though thy crest be shorn and shaven, thou," I said, "art 
     sure no craven,
Ghastly grim and ancient Raven wandering from the Nightly shore---
Tell me what thy worldly name is on the Night's Plutonian shore!"
                              Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

Much I marvelled this ungainly fowl to hear discourse so plainly,
Though its answer little meaning --- little relevancy bore;
For we cannot help agreeing that no living human being
Ever yet was blessed with seeing bird above his chamber door---
Bird or beast upon the sculptured bust above his chamber door,
                              With such name as "Nevermore."

But the Raven, sitting lonely on that placid bust, spoke only
That one word, as if his soul in that one word he did outpour.
Nothing farther then he uttered --- not a feather then he fluttered---
Till I scarcely more than muttered, "Other friends have flown before---
On the morrow he will leave me, as my Hopes have flown before."
                              Then the bird said, "Nevermore."

Startled at the stillness broken by reply so aptly spoken,
"Doubtless," said I, "what it utters is its only stock and store
Caught from some unhappy master whom unmerciful Disaster
Followed fast and followed faster till his songs one burden bore---
Till the dirges of his Hope that melancholy burden bore
                              Of 'Never --- nevermore.'"

This I sat engaged in guessing, but no syllable expressing
To the fowl whose fiery eyes now burnt into my bosom's core;
This and more I sat divining, with my head at ease reclining
On the cushion's velvet lining that the lamp-light gloated o'er,
But whose velvet-violet lining with the lamp-light gloating o'er,
                              She shall press, ah, nevermore!

Then, methought, the air grew denser, perfumed from an unseen censer
Swung by seraphim whose foot-falls tinkled on the tufted floor.
"Wretch," I cried, "thy God hath lent thee --- by these angels 
     he hath sent thee
Respite --- respite and nepenthe from thy memories of Lenore;
Quaff, oh, quaff this kind nepenthe and forget this lost Lenore!"
                              Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

"Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil! --- prophet still, if bird 
     or devil!---
Whether Tempter sent, or whether tempest tossed thee here ashore,
Desolate, yet all undaunted, on this desert land enchanted---
On this home by Horror haunted --- tell me truly, I implore---
Is there --- is there balm in Gilead? --- tell me --- tell me, 
     I implore!"
                              Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

"Prophet!" said I, "thing of evil! --- prophet still, if bird or devil!
By that Heaven that bends above us --- by that God we both adore---
Tell this soul with sorrow laden if, within the distant Aidenn,
It shall clasp a sainted maiden whom the angels name Lenore---
Clasp a rare and radiant maiden whom the angels name Lenore."
                              Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

"Be that word our sign of parting, bird or fiend!" I shrieked, 
     upstarting---
"Get thee back into the tempest and the Night's Plutonian shore!
Leave no black plume as a token of that lie thy soul hath spoken!
Leave my loneliness unbroken! --- quit the bust above my door!
Take thy beak from out my heart, and take thy form from off my door!"
                              Quoth the Raven, "Nevermore."

And the Raven, never flitting, still is sitting, still is sitting
On the pallid bust of Pallas just above my chamber door;
And his eyes have all the seeming of a demon's that is dreaming,
And the lamp-light o'er him streaming throws his shadow on the floor;
And my soul from out that shadow that lies floating on the floor
                              Shall be lifted --- nevermore.
 


(Taken from "Edgar Allen Poe: Selected Prose and Poetry," revised
 edition, New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1950.)